The importance of sound to the Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua, and the Atlantic haddock, Melanogrammus aeglefinus
Anthony Hawkins
Citation: The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 152, 1605 (2022); doi: 10.1121/10.0013994   
View online: https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0013994   
View Table of Contents: https://asa.scitation.org/toc/jas/152/3   
Published by the Acoustical Society of America

ARTICLES YOU MAY BE INTERESTED IN
A functional regression analysis of vessel source level measurements from the Enhancing Cetacean Habitat and Observation (ECHO) database The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 152, 1547 (2022); https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0013747
A basic protocol for the acoustic characterization of small and medium-sized classrooms The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 152, 1646 (2022); https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0013504
Predicting transmission loss in underwater acoustics using convolutional recurrent autoencoder network The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 152, 1627 (2022); https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0013894
An automated framework for long-range acoustic positioning of autonomous underwater vehicles The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 152, 1615 (2022); https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0013830
Machine learning in acoustics: Theory and applications The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 146, 3590 (2019); https://doi.org/10.1121/1.5133944
North Sea soundscapes from a fish perspective: Directional patterns in particle motion and masking potential from anthropogenic noise The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America 150, 2174 (2021); https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0006412

Take the Lead in Acoustics
The ability to account for coupled physics phenomena lets you predict, optimize,andvirtuallytest a design under real-worldconditions-evenbeforeafirstprototypeisbuilt
》 Learn more about COMsOL Multiphysics?

The importance of sound to the Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua, and the Atlantic haddock, Melanogrammus aeglefinusa)
Anthony Hawkinsb) The Aquatic Noise Trust, Kincraig, Blairs, Aberdeen, Scotland, United Kingdom

ABSTRACT:
The gadoid fishes, including the Atlantic cod and haddock, are currently being exploited close to their safe biological limits, requiring restrictions upon the human activities that may harm them. This has prompted interest in the biology of such fishes. Studies of the cod and haddock have shown highly complex behavior, involving prolonged and energetic visual and acoustic displays. Different sounds are produced in different behavioral contexts and are emitted almost continuously by cod and haddock, especially throughout the spawning season (February to May). The distinctive characteristics of these sounds make it possible to locate spawning cod and haddock at their marine spawning grounds. Human activities in these areas may affect their spawning adversely and have deleterious effects upon their stocks. Man-made sounds in water do have an adverse effect upon cod and haddock, and other fishes. Listening for the cod and haddock sounds provides a reliable, non-invasive technique for detecting their locations, and especially their spawning areas, and enables them to be protected well.
$\mathbb{C}2022$ Acoustical Society of America. https://doi.org/10.1121/10.0013994 (Received 12 July 2022; revised 19 August 2022; accepted 20 August 2022; published online 12 September 2022) [Editor: Michael L. Fine] Pages: 1605–1614

I. MY WORK ON FISHES AND THEIR SOUNDS
In this paper, I provide summaries of the work that I did on fishes, starting when I was very young, but continuing even after I retired from employment. Although my work covered many different species, I will focus in this paper on two especially interesting fishes, the Atlantic cod, Gadus morhua, and the Atlantic haddock, Melanogrammus aeglefinus.
As a child I was born and lived in Poole, Dorset, UK, which has the second largest natural marine harbor in the world. I received a boat from my mother when I was 12 years old (in 1954), and I was able to travel around Poole harbor, catching fishes, lobsters, and crabs. I then became interested in marine biology. In 1960, I started to attend the Department of Zoology at the University of Bristol. I first obtained a degree (BSc) in 1963, based on Zoology, and Animal Physiology. I then started my Ph.D. study at Bristol in 1964, focusing on the sounds made by fishes. One of the Bristol lecturers, Dr. H. P. Whiting, had been a naval officer during the Second World War and had used a hydrophone to listen for German submarines. He had heard some sounds that he thought were produced by fishes, and he asked me, as a student with boating experience, to try to detect the sounds made by fish species, and he provided me with his naval hydrophone for detecting sounds in water.
When I started work there were already several earlier papers that had been published on the sounds made by fishes. The earliest reports on fish sounds were listed in a London paper (Marshall, 1962). Later, Protasov (1965)
mentioned Zubov’s description of fishermen listening to fishes in the South China Sea. A review of fish sounds was also published in a paper by Tavolga (1964). Some of these papers also included work by Dufosse (1874a,b), Bridge (1904), and Weiss (1914). It was evident that many fishes produced sounds.
Some of these papers were based on fishes making sounds when they were removed from the water, while other scientists were dealing with sounds made in the water, detected them either using an aquatic hydrophone, or a microphone close to the water surface. Several fishes had received names that referred to their vocal abilities. The gray gurnard, Trigla gurnardus, was known in Scotland as the “crooner.”
Initially, my work was done on fish sounds in some small metal framed aquarium tanks, filled with seawater, in Bristol, and my findings were later contained within a dissertation submitted for my degree as a Doctor of Philosophy (Ph.D.) at the University of Bristol, together with later studies that I carried out in Scotland to assist my degree, as discussed below. In Bristol, the sounds were initially recorded from the yellow gurnard, Trigla lucerna. The sounds were made by the gurnard in response to fishes of the same and different species, and also in response to human interference. The sounds were low frequency knocks, repeated in short trains. I realized, however, that sounds made in small aquarium tanks could be distorted because of reflection from the tank walls and because of the presence of air at the top of the tank.
Listening to fish sounds as part of my Ph.D. degree was later carried out in the sea during March and June 1964 off the coast of Devon, well south of Bristol, where a boat was available. My naval aquatic hydrophone was lowered to the bottom of the sea, and I listened to many sounds using headphones connected to the hydrophone. No sounds were heard that resembled those recorded from the yellow gurnard in the Bristol aquarium tank, and none of the sounds that I heard could easily be linked by me to particular fish species. I therefore decided that I would need to carry out additional work on fish sounds at more practical locations.

II. MY MOVE TO ABERDEEN
Later, in 1964, I moved to the Marine Laboratory in Aberdeen (MLA), near the sea in the northeast of Scotland, to continue my doctoral research, because the laboratory had excellent aquarium facilities. The aquarium tanks were more than 10 meters in lateral extent and up to 5 meters deep. One of the tanks used to examine fish sounds, that was improved by me with help from the husband of Queen Elizabeth, is shown in Fig. 1. In the early 1960s, the MLA, part of the Department of Agriculture and Fisheries for Scotland, embarked upon fish behavior studies. I took part in their work, and later submitted my Ph.D. dissertation to Bristol University in September 1968. My Ph.D. was based mainly on sound production by marine fishes, and the dissertation that was submitted was entitled “A Study of Sound Production by Marine Fish.” However, I had also worked on the hearing abilities of fishes, fish migrations, fish energetics, and the behavior of fishes in response to fishing gears, and some of that was also included in the dissertation.
Some of the work I engaged in at Aberdeen in 1964, with Colin Chapman, an experienced marine biologist, also involved work at sea, initially monitoring the noise levels generated by fishing vessels and their trawls. Several scientists had suggested that the sounds generated by fishing vessels affected the behavior of fishes in their vicinity. Our noise trials were conducted on an acoustic range used by both naval and fishing vessels on the west coast of Scotland, the Solways Firth, using calibrated hydrophones placed close to the seabed (Chapman and Hawkins, 1969). Additional work was also carried out in the sea close to the Isle of Skye. Recordings were made using a calibrated sound pressure hydrophone placed on the seabed as the ship and trawl passed by. The trawl came within $100\mathrm{m}$ of the hydrophone, and on one occasion it actually hit the hydrophone. In a cooperative exercise with the Admiralty and the White Fish Authority, we especially monitored the sounds produced by the research vessel “Explorer” while it was travelling and towing the trawl. The fishing vessel noise dominated until the trawl towed by the ship moved very close to the hydrophone, when the trawl noise then dominated. The noise from the ship was composed of low frequencies, generally below $150\mathrm{c/s}$ and was derived mainly from the propeller. It reached levels of up to $20\mathrm{db}/1$ ubar at $100\mathrm{m}$ . The noise generated by the trawl was at very low frequencies of 2.5 to $5\mathrm{kc/s}$ . and was lower in amplitude at $100\mathrm{m}$ , often less than $10\mathrm{db}/1$ ubar. From this work, it seemed likely that fishes would be able to detect the sounds generated by ships and their trawls, and might respond to them by swimming away. I decided that I would need to do some research on the hearing abilities of fishes, as well as working on the sounds that the fishes were making themselves.
FIG. 1. (Color online) The sounds made by the cod and haddock were recorded using a hydrophone in several large Aberdeen Marine Laboratory aquarium tanks, supplied with water continuously pumped from the North Sea. Some spawning behavior took place within this especially large tank, which was improved by me together with Prince Phillip, the husband of Queen Elizabeth. (Figure Copyright 2022 Anthony D. Hawkins, all rights reserved.)
My first fish sound experiments in Aberdeen, carried out in the quite large aquarium tanks available, enabled me to listen to a great variety of large, deep-water fish species, including the Atlantic haddock (Hawkins and Chapman, 1966) and the Atlantic cod (Chapman and Hawkins, 1973). These fishes were caught at sea using hand-lines rather than trawls, as line-caught fishes were healthier and their behavior tended to be less altered by their capture. These fishes were closely observed visually in the aquarium tank, and their sound responses to other fishes of the same or a different species were noted. Sounds from a wide range of other species were also recorded including the John Dory, Zeus faber; the yellow gurnard, Trigla lucerna; the gray gurnard, T. gurnardus; the red gurnard, T. cuculus; the streaked gurnard, T. lineata; and the armed bullhead, Agonus cataphractus; and they were all described in my Ph.D. thesis document (“A Study of Sound Production by Marine Fish,” September 1968) submitted to Bristol University. The sounds from the haddock were especially interesting, as they varied between individuals, between males and females, and during different behavior patterns.
Later, in 1987, I became the Director of Fisheries Research for Scotland, and Coordinator of Fisheries Research for the UK. Although I continued to carry out work on fish sounds and hearing, I also became involved in wide aspects of fisheries management until 2010, working in many different countries, and even providing advice to the European Commission, on the management of fisheries in several of their seas.

III. THE IMPORTANCE OF SOUND TO FISHES

A. Sound production
Many fish species produce sounds, and active sound production by 133 families of teleost fishes, from 33 orders of fishes, has been documented by Looby et al. (2022). Sound production is mostly taking place socially, and especially during spawning in some species. The fish sounds are usually pulsed, with most of their energy below $3\mathrm{kHz}$ , and they can be described as clicks or grunts (Hawkins and Rasmussen, 1978). After my sound pressure measurement work on haddock sounds, the sound producing behavior of several other species (shown in Fig. 2) was examined, both in the Aberdeen aquarium and within the Scottish seas. The haddock was examined in particular detail and reported by Hawkins and Chapman (1966). Initially, some of our experiments on haddock sounds were not carried out in Aberdeen, but in a large concrete tank close to the sea at Cairnryan on the south west coast of Scotland. The tank was large enough to be able to tow components of trawls through it, and it was possible to monitor the responses of fish using a highresolution sector-scanning sonar within the tank. The sonar was developed at the University of Birmingham by Welsby and Dunn (1963). Colin Chapman and I discovered while working at Cairnryan that the haddock made especially interesting underwater sounds. We decided then that it might be useful to examine haddock in the Aberdeen (MLA) aquarium, where it was possible to observe them and listen very closely to a fairly large number of both male and female haddock. The haddock were captured using a small boat sailing from a port on the east coast of Scotland, Stonehaven. The haddock were captured at shallow depths $(<~10\mathrm{m})$ , to prevent damage to the swim bladder as they were brought up to the surface.
The haddock produced a range of sounds in different contexts in the aquarium at the MLA. Both male and female haddock produced short sequences of repeated “knocks” during agonistic encounters. During the spawning season, however, male fish produced many sounds which varied in their characteristics as courtship proceeded. Different behavioral acts leading up to the mating embrace were associated with particular sounds. A paper on the spawning of haddock in captivity was published in Nature (Hawkins et al., 1967). The wide range of different sounds made by the spawning haddock were later described in detail by Casaretto and Hawkins (2002). Spawning sounds made by other gadoid fish species were also examined at the MLA, including the Atlantic cod, the Pollack, Pollachius pollachius, and the Tadpole fish, Raniceps raninus (Fig. 2). The calls of these gadoid fishes were originally reported by Hawkins and Rasmussen (1978) and later by Hawkins (1993).
The haddock sounds, recorded within the aquarium tank consisted of a series of repeated knocks, each made of up of two short low-frequency pulses of sound, spaced close together (Figs. 2 and 3). The duration of each pulse, and the interval between the pulses within the knock, were measured, in association with the full length of the sound, the number of knocks and the knock interval (between the peak amplitude of the first pulses of consecutive knocks).
During spawning, the male haddock produce sounds that vary in their characteristics as courtship proceeds [described in detail by Hawkins and Amorim (2000)]. Distinctive sounds are associated with particular behavior patterns (as shown in Fig. 3). Each sound consists of a series of knocks, sometimes audible as grunts and hums, with different sounds associated with different behavior patterns. The knocks emitted by each male differ in their waveforms from the knocks produced by the other individual males. It was shown by Casaretto et al. (2015) that female and juvenile haddock make sounds, as well as adult males. Examination of the sounds from different sexes indicates that the sound waveform is a function of fish maturity, and it is gender specific.
FIG. 2. The sounds made by four Gadoid species in the MLA aquarium. The sounds are made up of repeated pulses, and they differ from one another by being produced in different patterns. The time bar is 1 s. [This image was modified from Hawkins (1993).]
FIG. 3. The sounds made by the haddock during spawning. In (a), the male haddock (with three blotches along its flank) is on the seabed, occupying a territory, and it produces knocking sounds to attract females. In (b), the male continues to make knocks as a female approaches it. In (c), the male makes more rapid knocking sounds, audible as a hum, as it leads a female up from the seabed. In (d), the male embraces the female, as it makes a more rapid humming sound. In (e), the embracing male and female swim upwards together, releasing their eggs and sperm into the water, so that they combine to generate a juvenile, and during this behavior the male stops making its sounds. The time bar is 0.1 s. [This image was modified from Casaretto et al. (2015).]

B. Fish sounds in the sea
Several research students came to the MLA to work with us on fish sounds, including individuals from Norway (Olav Sand), Denmark (Knud Just Rasmussen), Portugal (Clara Amorim), and Italy (Licia Casaretto and Marta Picciulin). Work with these students provided more detailed information on sound production by a range of fish species. Sound production outside the spawning periods was also examined. It commonly occurs during intraspecific and interspecific aggression, or when fishes are disturbed or frightened. If sounds are used during agonistic encounters they are usually accompanied with visual agonistic displays (Hawkins, 1993). Such sounds vary from low frequency grunts and drumming sounds to higher frequency creaking sounds, clicks, and stridulating sounds.
Hawkins and Rasmussen (1978) were able to show that the main differences in the calls of different gadoid fishes were based on their temporal structure, all the calls being made up of low frequency pulses that were repeated at different rates and in different groupings. The sounds were generated by the repetitive contraction of specialized “drumming muscles” attached to the gas-filled swim bladder, an organ that makes the fish bouyant.
The observations and sound analyses on captive fishes, carried out with the students at the MLA aquarium, provided information for locating particular species in the sea. It became evident, however, that studies of captive fish in aquarium tanks could be rather limited, and it was realized that it would be especially useful to study the behavior of wild fishes within the sea. The sonar system that was used in the aquarium tank had enabled the movements of fish to be examined in detail, and it was decided that it could also be used to study wild fish movements in the sea. Initially, in 1965, the haddock sounds were detected within the sea at Loch Ainort, on the Island of Skye, on the west coast of Scotland, and in Broad Bay, Isle of Lewis, in the Outer Hebrides. Later, in 1966, we moved to Loch Torridon, also on the west coast of Scotland, where fish hearing studies were also carried out [summarized recently by Hawkins and Chapman (2020)]. We worked at Loch Torridon for many years and were joined there by our students. A very precise locating of spawning haddock in the sea was also done in 2000 in a Norwegian fjord by me and my students. We detected the haddock sounds using a hydrophone held beneath a travelling boat. Listening was carried out at many locations within a fjord, Balsfjord, in Norway (Casaretto et al., 2014); shown in Fig. 4. Balsfjord is a subarctic fjord $(90\mathrm{km}^{2})$ with a shallow $(30\mathrm{m})$ depth at the opening to its entrance, but with depths in the inner fjord dropping to $190\mathrm{m}$ . The areas where the haddock sounds were detected were mostly within the inner, most southerly and deeper part of the fjord, where a small fishery takes place in the spring for both cod and haddock. Long sequences of repeated knocks were heard at a particular deep location in the fjord, similar to the display sounds recorded during the reproductive behavior by the haddock in the MLA aquarium. At night, the sounds merged into a continuous and loud low-frequency rumble, confirming that many vocal haddock were present. Spawning haddock were later found at the same unique location in Balsfjord in several successive years.

JASA
FIG. 4. (Color online) The presence of spawning haddock in the fjord at Balsfjord, Norway, determined by monitoring the sounds made by the male haddock, using a hydrophone held beneath a boat that travelled around the fjord. The dots show where listening took place, and they indicate whether haddock spawning sounds were detected or not detected. [This image was modified from Casaretto et al. (2014).]
At another site in Balsfjord (Laksvatn Bay), sounds different from those of haddock were heard. They consisted of long slow trains of grunts, resembling the sounds detected from Atlantic cod. Like haddock, cod in the aquarium had shown structured groupings with males holding territories which were visited by females selecting males and then spawning with them.
Our work confirmed that listening for fish sounds provides a reliable, non- invasive way of locating aggregations of spawning fishes in the sea, allowing close definition of their spawning ground areas. We have recently suggested that it is very important to map the spawning grounds of vocal fishes, such as the cod and haddock, and other species, to ensure that they are not badly affected by offshore human activities (Hawkins and Picciulin, 2019).
The more dominant male haddock occupy territories which they defend by means of aggressive displays, while producing trains of repeated knocking sounds. These males occupy a particular part of the sea bed and perform a dance there, patrolling, and engaging in the Solitary Display (SD). The females tended to operate mid-water and come down to the areas occupied by the males. Courtship is often prolonged, and starts when a female enters the territory of a male performing the SD. The female intrusion is then followed by a “lead and follow” phase. Female ingressions and retreats are accompanied by the male, that ceases his SD and approaches and displays himself to the female.
As courtship proceeds the male leaves his territory and moves around the female in tight circles, flicking his fins up and down and emitting humming sounds. The humming sounds are made up of rapidly repeated knocks, separated by intervals as short as $30\mathrm{ms}$ , and modulated in amplitude and repetition rate. Courtship culminates with the male fish mounting the female. The mount generally occurs higher up outside the male territory. The males and females press their ventral surfaces together, swim up through the water together, and then release their eggs and sperm at the same time. Some female haddock spawn at regular intervals over several week.
Both the male and female haddock produce short sequences of repeated knocks during agonistic encounters (Casaretto and Hawkins, 2002). The differences between male, female, and juvenile haddock have been reported by Casaretto et al. (2015). During the spawning period, the male haddock produces much longer sequences of knocks, lasting from several seconds to several minutes, the knocks being produced at intervals varying from 500 to $30\mathrm{ms}$ . At the very fastest rates, with intervals of less than $50\mathrm{ms}$ , the sounds are merged to create continuous humming.
Different behavioral acts leading up to the spawning embrace were associated with particular sounds, with the repetition rate of the knocks being varied. The rich diversity of sounds produced by the male haddock appeared to be especially characteristic of this species. It became clear that different individual males produced knocks with different waveforms (Casaretto et al., 2015). The amplitude ratio of the two pulses making up the knocks were also different for females and males. Female knocks also showed lower mean frequencies in both the first and second pulses.
The patrolling sounds made by the males on the seabed, with their individual characteristics, seem to allow the females to choose particular males (Casaretto and Hawkins, 2002). It was also concluded that the sounds may also enable competing males to judge the fitness of their neighbors. Later, during courtship, variations in the repetition rate of the sounds by the males may assist in synchronizing the release of sperm and eggs by both the males and the females.
Spawning behavior by the haddock is noisy and lengthy, and can easily be disrupted by sounds from other sources, reviewed by Hawkins (1993). Fishing in the vicinity of spawning haddock at the critical time, and the generation of sound by other human sources, may have an especially adverse effect upon their spawning success. Listening for the sounds can offer us a very effective and reliable means for detecting the precise areas where soundemitting fish spawn, enabling the protection of the spawning fishes. The various acoustic techniques which can be used to locate or track underwater fishes have been discussed by MacLennan and Hawkins (1977). In particular, a method of position fixing, which employs a large array of omnidirectional hydrophones used in conjunction with an ultrasonic transmitter, was described. It was confirmed that this method can be used to fix the positions of fishes with a high degree of accuracy. It can also be used to follow the movements of free-swimming fishes. providing information which cannot readily be obtained in any other way.

C. Hearing
In 1966, the Marine Laboratory allowed us to establish a research facility in the sea at Loch Torridon on the west coast of Scotland, with our principal objective of studying the hearing abilities of fishes and the role of sound in fish behavior [summarized by Chapman and Hawkins (1969) and Hawkins and Chapman (2020)]. Our research program included studies of fish hearing abilities, their responses to anthropogenic (human-made) sounds (termed noise), and their own production of sounds. Work was also carried out on the reflection of sounds by fishes, the noise made in the sea by fishing vessels and other human sources, and the movements and foraging activity rhythms of the Atlantic cod, including work on the acoustic tracking of fishes and crustaceans, observations on fishing gear operations, the calibration of sonar systems, and the biology of lobsters, scallops, and other marine invertebrates.
Our fish hearing experiments were carried out in midwater at Loch Torridon, at about $100\mathrm{m}$ from the shore (Fig. 5). An acoustic range was set up at a depth of $21\mathrm{m}$ . A tower was placed on the seabed, constructed from rigid PVC tubing, perforated with holes to admit water and release air. It became apparent that there is a real need for hearing and fish behavior experiments to be carried out within field facilities, like those at Loch Torridon, ideally in midwater at a location with minimal noise interference from shipping and other human activities. It also became evident that behavioral studies of directional hearing are best carried out in a free sound field.
It became apparent at Loch Torridon that that the detection of sounds by fishes like the cod and haddock was often masked by natural variations in the levels of ambient sea noise, and especially by the presence of anthropogenic sounds. Masking by anthropogenic noise can prevent the detection of the sounds made by the fish themselves and other sound signals of importance to them. There is now a need for more research on aquatic soundscapes, and how they may be deteriorating as a result of human activities.
The experiments on masking were carried out using the presentation of pure tone stimuli in the presence of different noise frequency bands (Hawkins and Chapman, 1975; Hawkins and Johnstone, 1978).
At Loch Torridon, the calibrated hydrophone was placed beneath the fish cage to measure the sound pressure. In the free sound field, it was also possible to estimate the particle motion levels at different distances from the source by measuring the sound pressure (Chapman and Hawkins, 1973). This was one of the key reasons for working in the sea. Fish hearing thresholds were determined over a range of pure tone frequencies, providing audiograms from several marine fishes, including the cod, the salmon, Salmo salar, the dab, Limanda limanda, the catfish, Ictalurus nebulosis, and later the haddock. The audiograms of some of the fishes determined in Loch Torridon are shown in Fig. 6. Most fishes have two ears and each ear includes three semicircular canals including otolith organs (the sacculus, utriculus, and lagena), each containing a dense and heavy otolith, that is responsive to gravity, sounds, and to movements of the head that are made by sounds and other actions. The otolith organs are especially sensitive to the particle motion generated by sound sources.
In some fishes, the sensitivity to sound pressure is provided by the gas-filled swim bladder. Changes in the volume of the swim bladder result from the passage of sound pressure, and these volume changes then generate particle motion within the fish body that passes to the ears. The effectiveness of the swim bladder in stimulating the fish ear appears to depend upon its closeness to the ear and its connections to it. In the cod, which has its swim bladder very close to the ear, deflation of the swim bladder, by removing the gas it contains, results in a change in the relative sensitivity to sound pressure (Chapman and Hawkins, 1973).
It also became apparent at Loch Torridon that that the detection of sounds by fishes like the cod and haddock is often masked by natural variations in the levels of ambient sea noise, and especially by the presence of anthropogenic sounds.
It became evident from our observations on the movements of wild cod in Loch Torridon that fishes could swim towards or away from some underwater sound sources.
FIG. 5. (Color online) The acoustic range within Loch Torridon consisted of several sound projectors, at different distances from the top of a tower, where a small fish cage was placed by divers and connected to the shore by cables. Underwater sound projectors, capable of generating frequencies down to about $30\mathrm{Hz}$ , as well as being moored at different distances, could also be placed at different angular positions relative to the top of the tower, where the fish cage was positioned. [These images based on Hawkins and Chapman (1975); Figure Copyright 2022 Anthony D. Hawkins, all rights reserved.]
Location of the source from which a sound is coming is likely to be very important to fishes (Hawkins and Sand, 1977). Detection of some sounds may enable them to seek out prey, avoid predators, find mates, and detect important spatial sound cues. Experiments were carried out using sounds from different directions, and it was confirmed that the cod could discriminate between sounds coming from different directions. The cod were conditioned to a short period of switching of a pulsed tone from one sound projector to another at different angles of azimuth. The fish readily responded to the switching when the projectors were separated in the horizontal plane. We later demonstrated that they are also able to discriminate between sound sources in the median vertical plane. The limit to directional discrimination in the vertical plane was as little as $16^{\circ}$ , whereas it was $20^{\circ}$ in the horizontal plane (Hawkins and Sand, 1977).
FIG. 6. (Color online) The hearing abilities of fishes studied in the sea at Loch Torridon. The salmon and dab were sensitive only to the particle motion, whereas the cod and herring (and also the haddock, studied later) were sensitive to the sound pressure as well as the particle motion. The natural conditions in Loch Torridon were often rather quiet when the hearing thresholds were determined. However, on a few occasions the ambient sea noise level was monitored and its levels are added to this figure. At low frequencies the cod, haddock and herring are likely to have their hearing abilities affected by the natural levels of noise in the sea. (Figure Copyright 2022 Anthony D. Hawkins, all rights reserved.)
We were further able to show that cod could discriminate between similar sounds generated by two aligned sound projectors at different distances (Hawkins and Sand, 1977). The cod can locate low frequency sound sources in threedimensional space. Fish using the particle motion are unlikely to determine the direction of sound source using the time of arrival, phase, and intensity at the two ears, which is how humans detect direction, using the sound pressure. The speed of sound in water is so fast that the signal differences at the two close ears are very small. Instead, the otoliths within the ears move in response to the particle motion, resulting in stimulation of the sensory cells, which are grouped in different directions. The directional characteristics of the sensory cells in different parts of the ear of the cod were examined by Hawkins and Horner (1981), confirming that they were stimulated by vibration at different angles in the horizontal plane.
This ability was explained in terms of the detection of particle motion by the otolith organs of the labyrinth, which are strongly directional in their response to oscillatory motion. Our results showed that the sacculus, utriculus and lagena all contained sensory hair cells, connected to the otoliths, that provided a basis for directional determination, playing a vital role in determining sound direction. We concluded that the otolith organs within the ears are involved in directional hearing, through the detection of particle motion. We also showed that fishes, like humans and other mammals, use auditory frequency filters to improve the detection of signals in the presence of ambient noise.
Some physiological approaches proved to be possible in a laboratory aquarium. We investigated the directional properties of the otolith organs by vibrating aquarium-based fish in different directions. Microphonic potentials were recorded from the inner ear of a haddock, where the fish in its small aquarium was mounted on a vibration table that was driven back and forth in different directions by an electromagnetic vibrator. The amplitude of the hearing potentials proved to be a function of both the stimulus strength and the direction of vibration (Enger et al., 1973).

IV. THE BEHAVIORAL RESPONSES OF FISH TO SOUNDS
It is especially interesting to examine the responses of fish to sounds within the sea. In recent years, humans have generated a great deal of underwater noise. Anthropogenic sounds from shipping, underwater explosions, seismic exploration, offshore construction, and sonars of various types, have raised the levels of ambient noise in the sea. MacLennan and Hawkins (1973) examined the sounds made during fishing, and considered the effects that this may have upon fishes, while we later examined the other sounds that are made in the sea (Hawkins, 1979). Natural sounds occurred, included the sounds of falling rain, breaking waves, wind driven waves, bubbles, spray, and turbulence. Less frequently, there were earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and lightning strikes generating intense sounds, which travelled over great distances. In addition, there were sounds from marine mammals, fish, and crustaceans adding to the background noise. The human generated sounds included: sounds generated by aircraft flying over the sea. Sounds from ships dominated the ambient noise levels in some parts of the ocean. Especially loud sounds were generated by sonar systems that are used to conduct surveys and locate objects in the water and on the seabed. Construction and industrial activities, both onshore, inshore, and offshore, also generated significant levels of noise in the sea. These activities included pile driving, dredging, drilling, the use of explosives in construction and decommissioning, and activities at oil- and gas-production facilities. Assessing the impacts of underwater sounds upon fishes and other forms of marine life has been reviewed by Hawkins and Popper (2014).
In examining underwater sounds it is of course important to monitor the particle motion as well as the sound pressure, as some fishes, like the haddock, are only sensitive to the particle motion. There is a need in hearing experiments on fishes to measure the particle motion, as well as carrying out work to better understand the relationship of sound pressure measurements and particle motion measurements in the habitats that fish are found in (often in shallow water). There is a need to develop accessible global archives of data (fish and other sounds, soundscape recordings, etc.). More work is also needed on directional hearing. Not just for cod and haddock but for other fish species. Such experiments may best be carried out in the sea, and not just in aquarium tanks, where the relationship between the sound pressure and particle motion can be abnormal.
I did some experiments in the sea on the natural movements of cod and their responses to man-made sounds (Hawkins et al., 1974). The cod were tracked using a pulsed ultrasonic transmitter inserted into the stomach, that was spatially located by measuring differences in the time of arrival of the acoustic pulses at an array of omnidirectional hydrophones on the seabed. The method was used to plot the movements of cod in enclosed sea-lochs (Loch Beag and Loch Torridon). The tracking of juvenile cod showed that they lived near the seabed in and around the edge of the Lochs, at depths between 10 and $20\mathrm{m}$ , moving within restricted home ranges (Hawkins et al., 1980), where they searched for food. The majority of Torridon cod were more active during the day rather than the night, although a few were nocturnal. In Loch Beag, the cod ranged widely throughout the loch initially, following their release, but later, as in Loch Torridon, they showed movements of only limited extent within home ranges. During the night the cod in Loch Beag moved over a wider area. Indeed, relatively few positions could be plotted during the day because the cod often occupied the same position on successive samplings. The areas occupied by different tracked cod were sometimes adjacent to one another, but they did not overlap to any great extent.
We also observed the behavior of wild, pelagic fish in response to sound playback using a sonar/echo sounder (Hawkins et al., 2014). The experiments were done in an enclosed, quiet, coastal sea lough (Lough Hyne, County Cork, on the southwest coast of Ireland). Schools of sprat, Sprattus sprattus, and mackerel, Scomber scombrus, were exposed to a short sequence of repeated impulsive sounds, simulating the strikes from pile drivers and seismic air guns, at different sound pressure levels. The incidence of behavioral responses increased with increasing sound level. Sprat schools were more likely to disperse, and mackerel schools more likely to change depth. The method of observation by means of a sonar/echo sounder proved successful in examining the behavior of fish exposed to different sound levels within the sea. This technique may allow further testing of the relationship between responsiveness, sound level, and sound characteristics of different types of man-made sound, for a variety of fish species under different conditions.

V. THE NEED FOR FURTHER WORK ON FISHBIOACOUSTICS
Ambient noise levels are now often much higher in the sea, lakes, and rivers because of human activities. Concern over the sustainability of fish stocks has resulted in the imposition of strong controls over their fisheries [reviewed by Hawkins (2021)]. However, very little specific protection has been given to the spawning fish. Indeed, some fisheries concentrate on spawning cod and haddock. Spawning takes place over a sand/gravel substrate at depths of $30{-}200\mathrm{m}$ and at temperatures of $3{\mathrm{-}}10^{\circ}\mathrm{C}$ . Fertilization is external. Each female repeats the spawning act at nearly regular intervals of $24\mathrm{h}$ or greater, over a period of several week, releasing a batch of several thousand eggs each time. Spawning behavior involves distinctive visual and acoustic displays.
There is a need for more work to quantify hearing in fishes and focused work on developing technology for particle motion measurement and understanding what such measurement mean, as well as work to better understand the relationship between sound pressure measurements and particle motion measurements.
There is also a real need for further studies describing the behavioral responses of free-living fish to man-made sounds, since neither the short nor long term effects are well understood. Such experiments are best carried out in the sea. There is especially a need for more work on directional hearing, and also work on other gadoid fishes.
In addition to doing basic science research, there is a growing interest in the effects of anthropogenic (humangenerated) sound on fishes [e.g., Popper and Hawkins (2019)]. In one collaboration we worked with a number of colleagues and developed interim criteria for effects of anthropogenic sound on fishes and turtles (Popper et al., 2014). Furthermore, in conversations with Arthur Popper, the two of us realized that one of the big problems regarding anthropogenic sound is that there was little cross-species and cross-sound source collaboration of sharing ideas and knowledge. Thus, starting in 2007, we initiated a series of tri-annual international conferences on The Effects of Aquatic Noise on Animals (Hawkins et al., 2008; Popper and Hawkins, 2012, 2016), the latest of which took place in Berlin, Germany, in July 2022.

VI. CONCLUSIONS
(1) As I have mentioned, many fishes are being damaged by human activities, including fishing, sea-surveys, seabed activities, and all the human activities that generate underwater sound, in the sea, and also in freshwater rivers and lakes.   
(2) The gadoid fishes, including the haddock and cod, especially need to be protected, as they provide us with very attractive food. However, many other fishes may also need to be protected. Sound is very important to the gadoid fishes, especially during their spawning activities, and it has been necessary to examine the sounds that they make themselves, and their responses to various sounds. It is now important to examine the importance of sound to some of the other fishes, both in the sea and in rivers and lakes.   
(3) In examining underwater sounds it is of course essential to monitor the particle motion as well as the sound pressure, as some fishes are only sensitive to the particle motion, as mentioned above. In fact, all fishes are very sensitive to the particle motion, and only some of them can also monitor the sound pressure. The otolith organs within the ears of the fish are especially involved in directional hearing through the detection of particle motion.   
(4) It is important to use sound detection to map the spawning grounds of sound-producing fishes, as many sounds are produced during their spawning behavior, and it is possible to map their spawning areas to ensure that they are not adversely affected by offshore human activities.   
(5) It is possible that the sounds that can be especially damaging to fishes may include the sounds from ships and their trawls, and from industrial activities including seismic surveys, pile driving, dredging, drilling, the use of explosives, and the operation of wind farms and oil and gas production facilities. There is a need to monitor all the sounds generated in water by human sources.   
(6) It is important that future investigators adopt approaches that seek information on what fishes can hear, how they use their sounds, whether they can detect sound pressure as well as particle motion, and how they respond to human sounds. Such work can be carried out in aquarium tanks, but more important work can often be carried out in the natural waters, including the sea, where the acoustic conditions are much more appropriate. There are real advantages in setting up zone sites in natural waters, where acoustic work on fishes can be carried out in a free sound field. Such sites have been set up in the past but are rarely available now for further studies to be carried out.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I thank Arthur Popper for his very useful comments on this manuscript.
Bridge, T. W. (1904). “Fishes, ascidians, etc.,” Nat. Hist. Cambridge 7, 355–365.   
Casaretto, L., and Hawkins, A. D. (2002). “Spawning behaviour and the acoustic repertoire of haddock,” Bioacoustics 12, 250–251.   
Casaretto, L., Picciulin, M., and Hawkins, A. D. (2015). “Seasonal patterns and individual differences in the calls of male haddock Melanogrammus aeglefinus,” J. Fish Biol. 87(3), 579–603.   
Casaretto, L., Picciulin, M., Olsen, K., and Hawkins, A. D. (2014). “Locating spawning haddock (Melanogrammus aeglefinus) at sea by means of sound,” Fish. Res. 154, 127–134.   
Chapman, C. J., and Hawkins, A. D. (1969). “The importance of sound in fish behavior in relation to capture by trawls,” FAO Fisheries Rep. 621,   
717–729.   
Chapman, C. J., and Hawkins, A. D. (1973). “A field study of hearing in the cod, Gadus morhua L,” J. Comp. Physiol. 85, 147–167.   
Dufosse (1874a). “Recherches sur les bruite et les sone expressife que font entendre les poissous de Europe” (“Research on the noises and the sounds that the fishes of Europe make”), Annle Sci. Nat. 5(19), 1–53.   
Dufosse (1874b). “Recherches sur les bruite et les sone expressife que font entendre les poissous de Europe” (“Research on the noises and the sounds that the fishes of Europe make”), Annle Sci. Nat. 5(20), 1–134.   
Enger, P. S., Hawkins, A. D., Sand, O., and Chapman, C. J. (1973). “Directional sensitivity of saccular microphonic potentials in the haddock,” Exp. Biol. 59, 425–434.   
Hawkins, A. D. (1979). “Sounds from the sea,” Recorded Sound 74-75, 81–85.   
Hawkins, A. D. (1993). “Underwater sound and fish behavior,” in Behavior of Teleost Fishes, edited by T. J. Pitcher (Chapman and Hall, London), pp. 114–153.   
Hawkins, A. D. (2021). “Adopting a wider ecosystem approach for fisheries management,” Earth Science and Climatic Change, JESCC-115.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Amorim, M. C. P. (2000). “Spawning sounds of the male haddock, Melanogrammus aeglefinus,” Environ. Biol. Fishes 59, 29–41.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Chapman, C. J. (1966). “Underwater sounds of the haddock, Melanogrammus aeglefinus,” J. Mar. Biol. Ass. 46, 241–247.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Chapman, C. J. (1975). “Masked auditory thresholds in the cod, Gadus morhua L.,” J. Comp. Physiol. 103, 209–226.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Chapman, C. J. (2020). “Studying the behavior of fishes in the sea at Loch Torridon, Scotland,” ICES Mar. Sci. 118, 1–9.   
Hawkins, A. D., Chapman, C. J., and Symonds, D. J. (1967). “Spawning of haddock in captivity,” Nature 215, 923–925.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Horner, K. (1981). “Directional characteristics of primary auditory neurons from the cod ear,” in Hearing and Sound Communication in Fishes, edited by W. N. Tavolga, A. N. Popper, and R. R. Fay (Springer, New York), Vol. 15, 311–328.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Johnstone, A. D. F. (1978). “The hearing of the Atlantic salmon, Salmo salar,” J. Fish Biol. 13, 655–673.   
Hawkins, A. D., MacLennan, D. N., Urquhart, G. G., and Robb, C. (1974). “Tracking cod, Gadus morhua L., in a Scottish sea loch,” J. Fish Biol. 6, 225–236.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Picciulin, M. (2019). “The importance of underwater sounds to gadoid fishes,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 146, 3536–3551.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Popper, A. N. (2014). “Assessing the impacts of underwater sounds on fishes and other forms of marine life,” Acoust. Today 10(2), 30–41.   
Hawkins, A., Popper, A. N., and Wahlberg, M. (2008). “Introduction: International Conference on the Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life,” Bioacoustics 17, 1–3.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Rasmussen, K. J. (1978). “The sounds of gadoid fish,” J. Mar. Biol. Assoc. 58, 891–911.   
Hawkins, A. D., Roberts, L., and Cheesman, S. (2014). “Responses of freeliving coastal pelagic fish to impulsive sounds,” J. Acoust. Soc. Am. 135, 3101–3116.   
Hawkins, A. D., and Sand, O. (1977). “Directional hearing in the median vertical plane by the cod,” Comp. Biochem. Physiol. A 122, 1–8.   
Hawkins, A. D., Urquhart, G. G., and Smith, G. W. (1980). “Ultrasonic tracking of juvenile cod by means of a large spaced hydrophone array,” in A Handbook on Medical Biotelemetry and Radio Tracking, edited by C. J. Amlaner and D. W. Macdonald (Pergamon Press, Oxford), pp. 461–470.   
Looby, A., Cox, K., Bravo, S., Rountree, R., Juanes, F., Reynolds, L. K., and Martin, C. W. (2022). “A quantitative inventory of global soniferous fish diversity,” Rev. Fish Biol. Fisheries 32, 581–595.   
MacLennan, D. N., and Hawkins, A. D. (1973). “Sound in fishing,” Fish Industry Rev. 3(1), 2–6.   
MacLennan, D. N., and Hawkins, A. D. (1977). “Acoustic position fixing in fisheries research,” Rapp. Pi-V. Reun. Cons. Int. Explor. Mer. 170, 88–97.   
Marshall, N. B. (1962). “The biology of sound producing fishes,” Symp. Zool. Soc. Lond. Biol. Acoust. 7, 45–60.   
Popper, A. N., and Hawkins, A. D. (2012). The Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life (Springer Science Business Media, New York).   
Popper, A. N., and Hawkins, A. D. (2016). The Effects of Noise on Aquatic Life II (Springer Science Business Media, New York).   
Popper, A. N., and Hawkins, A. D. (2019). “An overview of fish bioacoustics and the impacts of anthropogenic sounds on fishes,” J. Fish Biol. 94, 692–713.   
Popper, A. N., Hawkins, A. D., Fay, R. R., Mann, D. A., Bartol, S., Carlson, T. J., Coombs, S., Ellison, W. T., Gentry, R. L., Halvorsen, M. B., Lokkeborg, S., Rogers, P. H., Southall, B., Zeddies, D., and Tavolga, W. A. (2014). ASA S3/SC1. 4 TR-2014 Sound Exposure Guidelines for Fishes and Sea Turtles: A Technical Report Prepared by ANSI-Accredited Standards Committee S3/SC1 and Registered with ANSI (Springer, New York).   
Protasov, V. R. (1965). “Bioakustka Ryb. Akad. Nouk. S.S.S.R. Moscow,” in Marine Bio-Acoustics, edited by W. N. Tavolga (Pergamon, Oxford).   
Tavolga, W. N. (1964). “Sonic characteristics and mechanisms in marine fishes,” in Marine Bio-Acoustics, (Pergamon, Oxford), Vol. 1, pp. 195–211.   
Weiss, O. (1914). “Lautaussorungen der fische” (“Vocalizations of fish”), in Handbuch der Vergleichenden Physiologie, edited by H. Winterstein (Jena Verlag von Gustav Fischer, Stuttgart).   
Welsby, V. G., and Dunn, J. R. (1963). “A high-resolution electronic sector-scanning sonar,” Radio Electron. Eng. U.K. 26, 205–208.