PPICT: an integrated deep neural network for predicting inter-protein PTM cross-talk
Fei $\boldsymbol{Z}\mathrm{{hu}^{\dag}}$ , Lei Deng†, Yuhao Dai, Guangyu Zhang, Fanwang Meng, Cheng Luo, Guang Hu and Zhongjie Liang
Corresponding authors: Guang Hu, huguang@suda.edu.cn, Zhongjie Liang, zjliang@suda.edu.cn †Co-first authors: Fei Zhu and Lei Deng

Abstract
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) fine-tune various signaling pathways not only by the modification of a single residue, but also by the interplay of different modifications on residue pairs within or between proteins, defined as PTM cross-talk. As a challenging question, less attention has been given to PTM dynamics underlying cross-talk residue pairs and structural information underlying protein–protein interaction (PPI) graph, limiting the progress in this PTM functional research. Here we propose a novel integrated deep neural network PPICT (Predictor for PTM Inter-protein Cross-Talk), which predicts PTM cross-talk by combining protein sequencestructure-dynamics information and structural information for PPI graph. We find that cross-talk events preferentially occur among residues with high co-evolution and high potential in allosteric regulation. To make full use of the complex associations between protein evolutionary and biophysical features, and protein pair features, a heterogeneous feature combination net is introduced in the final prediction of PPICT. The comprehensive test results show that the proposed PPICT method significantly improves the prediction performance with an AUC value of 0.869, outperforming the existing state-of-the-art methods. Additionally, the PPICT method can capture the potential PTM cross-talks involved in the functional regulatory PTMs on modifying enzymes and their catalyzed PTM substrates. Therefore, PPICT represents an effective tool for identifying PTM cross-talk between proteins at the proteome level and highlights the hints for cross-talk between different signal pathways introduced by PTMs.
Keywords: post-translational modification, cross-talk, protein-protein interaction, elastic network model, deep neural network.

Introduction
Post-translational modifications (PTMs) of proteins enable cells to regulate protein functions and signal transductions, increasing the complexity of the proteome [1–5]. Multiple PTMs can work together to regulate specific biological outcomes, influencing the actions of each other positively or negatively, termed PTM crosstalk or PTM code [2]. PTM cross-talk may occur within one protein (intra-protein) or across different proteins (inter-protein). In interprotein PTM cross-talk, a PTM site in one protein affects the regulation of another PTM site in different proteins [6, 7], e.g. the combinatory actions of different histone PTMs coordinately regulate chromatin activity and transcriptional control, orchestrating the epigeenetic landscape of cells in unresolved histone codes [8, 9]. PTM cross-talk in different proteins can also occur by regulating binding surfaces for modifying enzymes, e.g. protein kinases, which control phosphorylation on numerous downstream substrates, and typically require phosphorylation of their activation loop for full activity. Additionally, PTMs on some E3 ligases or acetylases can enhance or block the ubiquitination or acetylation of their protein targets [10]. Coordinated PTM crosstalk between proteins is just needed to establish a dynamic protein–protein interaction (PPI) surface [3]. With the development of molecular pathology, increasing evidence demonstrates that deregulation of PTM cross-talks is involved in the genesis and development of various diseases, among which cancer appears to be the most widely studied [11, 12]. In conclusion, inter-protein PTM cross-talk allows cells to rapidly implement complex and decentralized signal processing modules, which plays a key and indispensable role in biology.
Although insight into the complexity of PTM cross-talk will help us better understand the etiology and provide novel targets for drug therapy [13, 14], PTM cross-talk research and experimental identification still face great challenges. Experiments include biochemistry in vitro, genetic or chemical interference, and PTM status can be detected by PTM antibody or Western blot or immunofluorescence [3]. As the experiments are time-consuming and costly, predicting PTM cross-talk sites has emerged as an intriguing topic with the accumulation of extensive PTM proteomic datasets. For example, the PTMcode web resource compiles PTM functional associations based on the same residue competition, structural distance and co-evolution features, indicating the regulatory role of PTM interplays tuning PPIs [15, 16]. As the first effort in compiling PTM cross-talk pairs reported in literatures with experimental evidence, the PTM-X server was finely designed for the prioritization of both intraand inter-protein PTM cross-talk candidates [17–19]. In PTM-X, PTM cross-talks in inter-proteins based on the random forest (RF) algorithm have higher sequence coevolution at both PTM residue and motif levels and have high co-modification across multiple species and tissues. To decipher the map of the in situ cross-talk of ubiquitylation and SUMOylation on the same lysine residue, the mUSP classifier was developed by integrating sequence motif enrichment, evolutionary conservation and structural information with the RF algorithm [20]. To predict PTM crosstalk within proteins, an integrated algorithm termed PCTpred was designed based on a group of residue- and residue pairbased properties from both sequence and structural perspectives [21]. These models largely enriched our understanding for the molecular basis underlying PTM cross-talk, and deciphered the potential cross-talk map at the proteomics level.
Two levels of information can be introduced for further improvement of PTM cross-talk prediction. At the molecular level, the intrinsic link between PTM dynamics and protein function should not be negligible [22–24]. In our recent work, with the application of elastic network models (ENMs), we emphasized protein dynamics to prioritize the functional phosphorylation sites using deep learning models [25], and proposed PTM dynamics inspired drug design in the kinase family [14, 26]. On the other hand, at the network level, the structural information underlying the PPI graph is crucial in capturing information about long-range dependencies for PTM cross-talk [27–29]. Identification of the specific PPIs that are associated with co-phosphorylation can be potentially useful in elucidating the mechanisms of these PTM communication [30]. With the network embedding method, PPI graph can provide contextual information about longrange effects for phosphorylation identification [31], mutation prioritization [32] and about additional effects in PTM studies [33, 34]. In a previous study, we proposed a new deep learning based framework named Structural Gated Attention Deep (SGAD) Model to improve the performance of PPI graph reconstruction (PINR) [35]. And deep learning methods are gradually demonstrating abilities in protein function and PTM prediction [36–39]. Hence it is highly desirable to develop a deep learning architecture for PTM cross-talk that combines heterogeneous structural-dynamics information underlying PTMs with the contextual information based on a PPI graph.
For the above, in this work, we propose a novel deep neural network, named PPICT (Predictor for PTM Inter-protein CrossTalk), to accurately predict PTM cross-talk by effectively extracting and combining protein sequence-structural-dynamics information and structural information of the PPI graph. The integrated deep learning architecture for PPICT can be divided into three distinct nets, including sequence-structural-dynamics feature pre-processed net (Pre-W net), PPI graph and PTM cross-talk graph feature coding net (PPIG net) and heterogeneous feature combination net (HRF net). The performance of the method was studied by comprehensive experiments. The evaluation index scores show that the model significantly improves the prediction performance of PTM cross-talk and is superior to the existing PTM-X prediction method.

Materials and methods Data collection
PTM Cross-talk data
We followed the steps proposed by Huang et al. [18] to collect the experimentally verified PTM cross-talk pairs. The keyword combination ‘((cross AND (talk OR regulate OR link)) OR interplay) AND post translational modification’ was adopted to search the PubMed database. We obtained 37 cross-talk pairs in interproteins by reading 735 associated articles from 2017 to 2022. In addition, 199 cross-talk pairs before 2017 collected by Huang et al. [18] were also used in this work. By removing duplicated data, 236 pairs of PTM cross-talk between human proteins (containing 104 proteins) were found. As the cross-talk data are much rare to date, the relationships between PTM pairs, including ‘facilitate’ and ‘inhibit’, were both collected, and the quantitative information was not included. We downloaded protein sequences of the 104 human proteins from the UniProt database [40], searched all PTM sites from the PhosphoSitePlus database [41] and then manually checked the accuracy of the sites and PTM types for referring to the iPTMnet [42], EPSD [43] and CPLM [44] databases. The PTM types involved in PTM cross-talk pairs are also counted, as shown in Table 1.
In addition, we downloaded the PDB files of the 104 human proteins from AlphaFold database(https://alphafold.ebi.ac.uk/entry) [45]. To ensure the reliability of the structure, the residues with AlphaFold confidence score (pLDDT) less than 50 were removed. By mapping PTM sites into high-quality protein structures, the detailed information about these 236 PTM cross-talk pairs is obtained in Supplementary Table S1.

Potential PTM cross-talk data
Theoretically, PTMs on PTM enzymes may change their activity and therefore regulate the modification of their substrates, and such is potential PTM cross-talk. Herein, we collected the kinase-substrate information from the PhosphoSitePlus database, HAT-substrate and E3-substrate information from HAT-specific acetylation site prediction [46] and E3-specific ubiquitination site prediction [47] research works. Then, the regulatory ‘on activity’ of PTMs in kinases, acetylases (HATs) and E3 ligases and their catalyzed PTM sites, including phosphorylation, acetylation and ubiquitination sites, were collected as potential PTM cross-talks for model validation. (Details are shown in the Supplementary Tables S2, S3 and S4). In contrast, the generation of control sets can be seen in the Supplementary Information Section 1 and Supplementary Table S5 and S6.

PPI data
Based on the 104 human proteins used in the PTM cross-talk dataset, we also found the PPI information between these 104 proteins from the four databases, including STRING [48] (with a composite score of more than 900), HPRD [49], I2D [50] and BioGrid [51], respectively, and obtained the final PPI dataset by taking the merged set. Finally, there were 852 interacting edges between these 104 proteins, namely, 852 pairs of PPIs, stored in Supplementary Table S7. The composition of 104 protein interactions is shown in Figure 1A. Additionally, the composition of PTM crosstalks is shown in Figure 1B.
Figure 1. (A) The PPI graph of 104 proteins related to the inter-protein PTM cross-talk; Note: A larger node indicates a greater degree of the node and more associated PPIs. (B) The cross-talk graph of 104 proteins related to the inter-protein PTM cross-talks; a thicker edge in the graph indicates a larger number of cross-talks between them; a larger node indicates a greater degree of the protein.

Architecture of PPICT
To better predict inter-protein PTM cross-talk, a novel deep learning framework was proposed in this work, as shown in Figure 2.
It consists of two feature coding nets (Pre-W and PPIG) and a heterogeneous feature combination net (HRF). Specifically, Pre-W net is mainly based on a series of precise sequence, structure and dynamics features extracted by PTM sites in PTM cross-talk, and these features obtained after pre-processing are called W (weight). PPIG net is used to extract generalized protein pairs from the PPI graph and PTM cross-talk graph. Finally, HRF net is introduced to combine the features from Pre-W and PPIG nets to predict PTM cross-talk.
Figure 2. The integrated architecture of PPICT. It is mainly composed of three nets (Pre-W, PPIG and HRF), and the introduction of specific nets can be seen in the corresponding part of this paper. The figure also briefly describes inter-protein PTM cross-talk. Note: The PPI graph and cross-talk graph in the figure are just a sketch map, and the detailed graphs are shown in Figure 1.

Pre-W net
Pre-W net is mainly divided into two parts. The first part is to extract a series of features for protein sequence, structure and dynamics characterization. In detail, the evolutionary information between protein pairs was calculated by Evol [52] in ProDy (Python package). The network features based on the 3D structures of proteins were calculated by NACEN (R package) [53]. A series of dynamic features were calculated with ENMs in ProDy [54]. These feature calculation methods can be seen in the Supplementary Information Sections 2.1–2.3 (Sequence (Seq), Structure (Str) and Dynamics (Dyn) feature extraction methods). According to the position of PTM sites in protein sequences and structures, a feature vector (32) representing each residue underlying PTM cross-talk was used as a generalization feature rather than a global feature. The second part is the network model for preprocessing the extracted features, and the feature vector obtained after pre-processing is called the W weight vector $\left(F_{w}\right)$ .

PPIG net
In PPIG net, we first introduced PPI feature information to improve PTM cross-talk identification. PPIG net is mainly divided into three parts. In the first part, FEGS [55] was used to encode the protein sequence and extract the corresponding feature vector (578). In the second part, the PPI information of 104 proteins found in four databases was used to encode the PPI graph by SDNE [56]. Meanwhile, the features generated from protein sequence coding by FEGS were added as the features of each node of PPIs, yielding a protein feature matrix (128) for each protein. In addition, PTM cross-talk pairs could also be transformed into a weighted undirected graph, in which the number of PTM cross-talks is used as the weight of the edge. Combined with the protein feature matrix from PPIs and protein sequence coding, PTM cross-talk graph embedding was added to improve the prediction effect of PTM cross-talk. Using Linear_VAE [57] (Supplementary Figure S1) to encode the PTM cross-talk graph constitutes the third part of the net. The difference of the PPI graph with the PTM cross-talk graph lies in the fact that the information contained in the PPI graph is more comprehensive and complete than that in the PTM cross-talk graph. We will explain the three parts of PPIG net below.

Protein sequence encoder FEGS
Protein sequence feature extraction is widely used in various fields of protein analysis. The newly developed Feature Extraction based on Graphical and Statistical features (FEGS) method can extract protein sequence features based on the physicochemical properties of amino acids and the statistical features of protein sequences [55]. This method makes full use of the physicochemical properties and statistical information of amino acids in protein sequences, and proposes a new graphical representation method of protein sequences. By integrating the graphical features and statistical features of protein sequences, the 578-dimensional vector $f_{p}$ was finally obtained as the feature vector for each protein. The detailed feature extraction can be seen in the Supplementary Information Section 2.4 (FEGS).

PPI graph embedding using SDNE
By taking the $F_{p}$ encoded by FEGS for protein sequence as the node feature, the graph encoding method SDNE (Structural Deep Network Embedding) was used to encode the PPI graph. SDNE applies deep learning to network embedding [56], and designs a deep model composed of multi-layer nonlinear functions to capture the highly nonlinear network structure. It captures both the local and the global structure of the network, preserving a large degree of information about the network. In the same time, the data in the PPI graph have integrity so that information leakage is effectively avoided. The SDNE coding method can be seen in the Supplementary Information Section 2.5 (SDNE) and some important parameters are demonstrated in Supplementary Table S8.

Cross-talk graph embedding using Linear_VAE
Except for PPI graph, we also conducted PTM cross-talk graph, in which the number of cross-talks on each protein is treated as the node weight. Then, the number of cross-talks between protein pairs is treated as the edge weight $\mathrm{W}_{2}$ . Therefore, the cross-talk graph contains 104 nodes (proteins) and 101 edges with weight (edges exist if cross-talk occurs between protein pairs) (see Figure 1B). For PTM cross-talk graph, the $f_{p}$ feature extracted by SDNE was used as the original node feature, and the weight vector $\mathsf{W}_{1}$ was used to update each node feature to obtain a new $F_{p}$ , that is, $F_{p}~=~\mathrm{W}_{1}\times f_{p}$ . Then, the cross-talk graph was encoded by Linear_VAE to extract the corresponding node feature $\left(F_{p}\right)$ , and the combination feature of the protein pair $\cdot(P_{i},P_{j})$ was obtained $(f_{p a\mathrm{i}r}=F_{p i}+F_{p j})$ . Subsequently, the $f_{p a\mathrm{i}r}$ was multiplied by $\mathsf{W}_{2}$ to obtain the final protein pair feature $F_{p a i r}$ . The Linear_VAE encoding method can be seen in the Supplementary Information Section 2.6 (Linear_VAE), and some important parameters can be seen in the Supplementary Table S8.
Then we used SDNE and Linear_VAE, followed by training with an unsupervised learning-based method, which is to discover underlying structures from unlabeled data. As unsupervised learning-based method does not require labeling of data; a lot of human efforts are therefore saved and more data can be involved in training.

HRF net
After extracting $F_{w}$ and $F_{p a i r}$ features using the above two nets, HRFnet further combined features for the final prediction of PTM cross-talk. HRF net used bilinear feature module to capture the complex correlation between heterogeneous $F_{w}$ features and $F_{p a i r}$ features, rather than directly connecting features to obtain combined features, which were subsequently used for PTM crosstalk training and prediction. The detailed process is described as follows: For input $F_{w}$ and $F_{p a i r}$ , bilinear feature modules can be formulated as:
where $f_{B}$ represents the bilinear feature, and is reconstructed into one-dimensional tensor $f_{C}$ through a flattened layer, which is then fed into the prediction (training) model. Finally, the predicted score of PTM cross-talk can be calculated by the following formula:
where ${{\sf W}_{c}}$ is the weight matrix of the classification model, similar to the weight matrix of the Softmax function. To evaluate the predictive performance of PPICT, the imbalanced learning method
and evaluation metrics can be seen in Supplementary Figure S2 and Supplementary Information Section 3.1.

Experimental setup
Experiments were performed optimally with the parameters shown in Table 2. In addition, when we adjusted the dimensions of the hidden layers, the effect on the result was minimal.

Evaluation metrics
To better evaluate the predictive performance of PPICT, we used some commonly used performance evaluation metrics, including the area under the ROC curve (AUC), the area under the precisionrecall curve(AUPR), sensitivity $(S n)$ , specificity $(S p)$ , precision (Pre), accuracy (Acc), $F_{1}$ score $\left(F_{1}\right)$ and Matthew’s correlation coefficient (MCC). The calculations of these measurements are as follows:
where TP, TN, FP and FN refer to true positives, true negatives, false positives and false negatives, respectively. The precisionrecall curve has recall as the horizontal coordinate and precision as the vertical coordinate; AUPR is the area under the curve.

Imbalanced learning method
In this work, we used 10-fold cross-validation (10-CV) to evaluate the predictive performance of the PPICT model and comparison methods. There were 236 positive samples and 9470 negative samples. To balance the training data, both the positive and negative samples were first divided into two parts with a one-toone ratio. Subsequently, 50 training subsets were generated from one part and 10 test subsets were generated from the other so that there were no public samples between them. Five training subsets and one test subset were selected at a time. After 10 times, all training subsets and test subsets were used up, and the evaluation indicators were obtained. Finally, AUC, Sn, Sp, Pre, ACC, $F_{1}$ and MCC were used to measure the performance of the results. The details can be seen in Supplementary Information Section 3.

Functional and Pathway Enrichment Analysis
The web server named DAVID Bioinformatics Resources [58, 59] was used for GO and KEGG pathway enrichment analysis. The hypergeometric test was adopted for the enrichment analysis and the P-value was calculated with the hypergeometric distribution [59]. At the same time, the Benjamini method was used to correct the P-value [59]. Terms with corrected P-value $<0.05$ were selected as significantly enriched terms.

Results Analysis of PPI and PTM cross-talk graphs
With the PPI information from the four databases (STRING, HPRD, I2D and BioGrid), the PPI graph of 104 proteins from our selected PTM cross-talk data was constructed (Figure 1A and Supplementary Table S7). Among EGFR, TP53, STAT3 and protein kinases, including SRC, MAPK1 and MAPK3, act as the hubs in this PPI graph. These hubs represent the popular targets in drug design, indicating their complicated regulation in cellular signaling pathways through PTM cross-talk. Compared with the tightly connected PPI graph, the PTM cross-talk graph is much sparser with isolated modules (Figure 1B). Notably, the phosphorylation sites in kinases co-regulate many PTMs in substrates, forming the largest module in the cross-talk graph. Several proteins have multiple PTM cross-talk events. For example, CDC25C had 26 events, CDK1 had 22 events and AKT1 had 18 events (Supplementary Table S9). In addition, 17 PTM cross-talk events occurred between CDC25C and CDK1, representing the most cross-talks between protein pairs (Supplementary Table S10). This is attributed to the fact that the phosphorylations of T14, Y15 and T161 in CDK1 can inhibit or facilitate multiple phosphorylation sites in CDC25C. Specifically, the PTM cross-talks, including acetylation, phosphorylation and methylation, between histone proteins form the second largest module, acting as the histone code to regulate gene expression at the level of chromatin structure [8]. As the reported PTM crosstalks to date is extremely limited, many PTM cross-talks occur in isolated protein pairs.

Evaluating the performance of PPICT Performance evaluation with W features
We first evaluated the predictive performance of Pre-W net in our proposed PPICT method. By fusing the selected Seq, Str and Dyn features, named as W features, we evaluated them with random forest after pre-processing. As shown in Table 3 and Figure 3A, when using the preprocessed W features, there was limited improvement in the predictive AUC value (0.788) and AUPR value (0.786) for PTM cross-talk compared with PTM-X (AUC: 0.774, AUPR: 0.785). In addition, we separately evaluated the performance of Pre-W net only using Seq features, named the WSeq model. The decreased AUC and AUPR values (AUC from 0.788 to 0.663, AUPR from 0.786 to 0.719) emphasized the importance of Str and Dyn features underlying PTM cross-talk residues.
Subsequently, we further analyzed the significant differences in Seq, Str and Dyn features from Pre-W net in Supplementary Table S11. As supported in PTM-X, residues underlying PTM cross-talks display higher conservation (corresponding to a lower entropy value) and higher coevolution coupling compared with negative cross-talks. Regarding structural network topology, residues underlying PTM cross-talks display lower degree, higher betweenness and closeness values, indicting their importance in protein network communication. The high betweenness and closeness values have also been captured in PTM cross-talk in intra-proteins [21]. Regarding dynamics features, the residues underlying PTM cross-talks possess high fluctuations and high potential in signal sensing and effecting, corresponding to their high potential in allosteric communication in protein structures.

Performance evaluation with both W and protein-pair features
To evaluate the performance of our proposed PPICT in combining W features and protein pair features, we conducted PPICT in four other versions: (1) W_PPI, in which the protein feature extracted by FEGS was used as the node feature of PPI graph, with SDNE as graph embedding and the final HRF net was used to combine W features with the PPI features; (2) W_CT, in which the protein feature extracted by FEGS was directly used as the node feature of PTM cross-talk graph, with Linear_VAE as graph embedding and the final HRF net was used to combine W features with the crosstalk pair features; (3) PPICT∗, in which both the W features from Pre-W net and the complete protein pair features from PPIG net were fully used, but both features were directly connected without using the matrix multiplication; (4) PPICT_Seq, in which only the sequence features from Pre-W net and the complete protein pair features from PPIG net were used for heterogeneity. To strictly evaluate the contributions of the PPI graph and PTM cross-talk graph, we strictly kept the proteins appearing in the training set as far as possible from the test set.
As listed in Table 3, compared with using W features alone, the introduction of protein pair features, from either PPI graph or PTM cross-talk graph, improved the predictive performance for PTM cross-talk, with AUC and AUPR values $>0.8$ . In comparison of structural features from PPI and PTM cross-talk graphs, the performance of W_PPI (AUC: 0.864, AUPR: 0.831) was slightly better than the performance of W_CT (AUC: 0.855, AUPR: 0.828), indicating that the structural information of the PPI graph could supplement the enriched long range effect for PTM cross-talk. Meanwhile, the performance of PPICT (AUC: 0.869, AUPR: 0.852) was somewhat better than the performance of both W_PPI (AUC: 0.864, AUPR: 0.831) and W_CT (AUC: 0.855, AUPR: 0.828), illustrating that the structural information of the PPI graph and PTM cross-talk graph is complementary and helpful. In addition, in the comparison of W_seq and W, the introduction of structural and dynamic features underlying PTM cross-talk improved the performance of AUC values from 0.663 to 0.788 and AUPR values from 0.719 to 0.786. In PPICT_seq, the introduction of protein pair features from PPIG net largely improved both AUC and AUPR values. This observation indicates that the long-range effect underlying protein pair features could compensate for the shortage of protein structural and dynamics information and even display a greater advantage for capturing PTM cross-talk, which is meaningful for the locations of PTMs in disordered regions. Finally, in the HRF net, the introduction of matrix multiplication improved the performance AUC and AUPR values (AUC: from 0.859 of $\mathrm{PPICT*}$ to $0.869$ of PPICT, AUPR: from 0.842 of $\mathrm{PPICT*}$ to 0.852 of PPICT), demonstrating the strength of PPICT in heterogeneous feature combination for PTM cross-talk prediction.
Figure 3. Performance evaluation of different feature combinations. (A) Comparison the AUC score values of ablation models and PPICT; (B) Comparison the AUC score values of PTM-X model, PPICT_Seq and PPICT.

Performance evaluation with RF in HRF net
In HRF net, we compared the RF method with other methods, including GBDT, CNN, FNN, Decision Trees (DT) and Adaboost. The results showed that RF outperformed other methods, especially for the AUC (0.869) and AUPR (0.852) values (The details can be seen in Supplementary Information Section 5). The advantages of RF over other methods could be attributed to the following factors: (1) When there is classification imbalance, RF can provide an effective way to balance the error of the dataset; (2) RF can handle very high-dimensional data (i.e. data with many features) and does not have to do feature selection; (3) the RF algorithm has a strong resistance to interference and is more resistant to overfitting.

Comparison with other methods
As a representative method for predicting inter-protein PTM crosstalk, PTM-X applies a random forest model with the coevolution and co-modification features at both the sequence and modification levels [19]. We subsequently compared PPICT and PTM-X face to face, as shown in Figure 3B and Table 3. Under various indicators, PPICT has improved the predictive performance compared with PTM-X. Specifically, the AUC value (0.806) of PPICT_Seq performance, which used the sequence features from Pre-W net and protein pair features from PPIG net, is also better than PTMX (0.774), further emphasizing the structural information from PPI and cross-talk graphs. In the unbalanced learning sampling, PPICT displays robustness and stable advantages as shown in Supplementary Figure S3. In the visualization of features, PPICT also has a stronger discriminative ability in distinguishing crosstalk and negative samples (Supplementary Figure S4). (The details can be seen in Supplementary Information Sections 3.2–3.3).
The reasons for the better performance of our proposed PPICT could be attributed to the following aspects: (1) in addition to the sequence information, Pre-W net also considers protein structural and dynamics features to characterize PTM cross-talk pairs; (2) the introduction of structural features of PPI graph and PTM cross-talk graph provides the long-range dependency information, which plays a key role in predicting cross-talk; (3) matrix multiplication in HRF net has obvious advantages in fusing the sequence structural and dynamic information, and graph information, which can not only perfectly characterize the generalization features of PTM pairs but also have better advantages when combined with the structural and dynamic features of proteins. In addition, we also predicted and compared the predicted results of multiple samples on PTM-X and PPICT, as shown in Table 4 for more details.

Analysis of PTM cross-talks in PTM enzyme–substrate pairs
As aforementioned, PTMs with activity regulation on protein PTM enzymes, including kinase, HAT and E3 enzymes, can directly modulate their substrate modifications, which could be considered as potential PTM cross-talks. To identify the functions of the PTM cross-talks in these enzyme-substrate systems (Supplementary Tables S2–S4), we performed the KEGG pathway and Gene Ontology enrichment analysis based on these kinase-, HAT and E3- substrates (Figure 4A–C). Kinase- and HAT- substrates share the same most significant pathway, namely, ‘Prostate cancer’. In addition, two pathways of ‘Pathways in cancer’ and ‘Hepatitis B’ are enriched in three enzyme-substrate systems, suggesting the negligible roles of PTM cross-talk in cancer progression and viral infection. Except for the phosphorylation and ubiquitination directly related biological processes, transcription-related functions were enriched as the dominating biological processes in the three categories, including ‘positive regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter’, ‘positive regulation of transcription, DNA-templated’ and ‘negative regulation of transcription from RNA polymerase II promoter’ processes. Concerning cellular component, in comparison with other enzyme-substrate systems, the HAT-substrates were mainly located in the nucleus, consistent with the regulation of transcription. For molecular functions, protein binding was shared in the three systems, indicating the potential role of PTMs in mediating PPIs. Additionally, protein kinase binding was enriched in E3-substrates, indicating the cross-talk of ubiquitination and phosphorylation, which have been confirmed to be important in many cellular processes. To further verify the predictability for functional PTM cross-talks, PPICT (with Pre-W and PPI graph and without FEGS and cross-talk graph) was applied to generate a score for each of these potential PTM cross-talks, in kinase-, HAT-, E3- substrates and control group (details are shown in the Supplementary Information Section 1). As shown in Figure 4D, the score from PPICT ranked PTM pairs involved in kinase-, HAT- and E3-substrate higher than the overall background. As the information was not included in the model construction, our metric very strongly captures the PTM cross-talks from the background data. The Control dataset in
Figure 4D can be viewed as the predicted scores for the negative dataset. Although most of the kinase-substrate pairs scored approximately 0.5, it was still much better than the scores of the Control dataset. When we used 0.5 as the threshold of determined cross-talk, it turned out that almost all kinase-substrate crosstalks cored greater than 0.5.

Unknown PTM cross-talks predicted by PPICT and PTM-X
The newly proposed PPICT method can reproduce existing PTM cross-talks as well as capture some unmentioned PTM cross-talks in the control dataset. In Table 4, we used the PPICT and PTMX models to predict and score all the samples in the control dataset. After sorting the comprehensive scores (Com_Score), we listed the samples whose scores from both models were above 0.75. Based on Table 4, it can be seen that not only are their high comprehensive scores, but the scores of individual models can remain high. The predicted PTM cross-talk pairs with high scores mainly focus on histone proteins, including H4 and H3F3A. As the combinatory histone code plays crucial roles in the epigenetic landscape, our predicted PTM cross-talks just supplements information for further experimental evaluation. In summary, the PPICT model can both predict PTM cross-talk alone and supplement and strengthen the PTM-X model to achieve the best prediction performance; more predicted scores can be found in Supplementary Table S12. In Table 4, although the prediction scores of PTM-X model are much higher, it does not mean that the higher scores represent the better model performance. In addition, the prediction scores from PTM-X are almost identical for PTM cross-talk pairs in the same protein pairs, whereas the prediction scores from PPICT are more specific as more features were used in characterizing PTM cross-talk pairs. To combine the advantage of both models, a composite score was used as the final prediction score in this study.

Conclusion
In the era of functional proteomics, the functional landscape underlying PTMs has become the bottleneck in proteomics, and the research on PTM cross-talk is significantly lagging behind. Previous research on PTM cross-talk between proteins mainly remained at the sequence level, and very few structural and dynamics features underlying PTMs were considered. Moreover, although previous studies have focused on the association features between PTMs, structural information from PPI graph or PTM cross-talk graphs has not been introduced. In view of this, we designed an integrated algorithm, PPICT, not only from the structure and dynamics level of proteins, but also from the interaction between protein pairs and the structural relationship between PTM cross-talk pairs. To develop PPICT, we created three nets, named Pre-W, PPIG and HRF, based on the classification of features, and analyzed these three nets from different perspectives. Experimental results show that protein-based structural and dynamics features make up for the shortcomings of traditional sequence features in describing PTM cross-talk. Furthermore, the newly introduced structure information based on the PPI graph and cross-talk graph better describes the difference between cross-talk and negative.
Figure 4. (A–C) The enrichment analysis based on GO and KEGG pathways of genes involved in Kinase, HAT and E3 sets (Showing the top eight terms in each category according to P-value); (D) It shows how the cross-talk scores predicted by our model ranked Kinase sets $n=2000$ , randomly selected from the Kinase dataset), HAT sets $n=1586$ ) and E3 sets $n=2667$ ), which have potential cross-talk, higher than the control sets. It means that our model performs well in predicting the inter-protein PTM cross-talks.
Compared with the state-of-the-art method PTM-X, PPICT shows stable improvements in different indicators. As the interprotein PTM cross-talk is largely under studied due to its large protein pair space and lack of a gold standard dataset, we selected potential PTM cross-talks involved in kinase, HAT and E3- substrates, just enriching the reference data for model validation. By evaluating PPICT on these reference data, the higher score distribution compared with the control set just validated its high prediction performance. At the same time, we trained and evaluated PPICT on pho-others dataset, in which the training sets only included the pho-pho cross-talks, and the test sets included other PTM types of cross-talks. The AUC value of the
PPICT could achieve 0.809, demonstrating the model is robust in PTM types and the prediction could be used for PTM types that are not included in the training sets. It can be seen that PTM crosstalk plays an indispensable role in supplementing the study of cancers, and also provides new insights for cancer therapy.
In conclusion, as a novel model, PPICT can effectively predict PTM inter-protein cross-talk. Although the interaction between modifications is considered to be a universal regulation mode based on PTMs, there are still few experimentally verified PTM cross-talk events in this regard. PPICT can be used as an auxiliary tool to guide the study of cross-talk, and open an alternative avenue for the study of cross-talk and other proteomics-related experiments. On the other hand, the PPI graph used in PPICT only focuses on the proteins with reported PTM cross-talks. As the proteome-scale networks reveal cell-specific and time-specific remodeling of the human interactome [60], the introduction of specific PPI information would make the PTM cross-talk more functionally meaningful. Finally, by integrating protein structure and specific PPI information, PPICT can not only better calculate the probability of cross-talk between two PTM sites, but also explore more information about their interaction under structural information. Therefore, PPICT can strengthen our understanding of PTM cross-talk events at multiple levels.

Key Points
• Three-dimensional structural and dynamic features in terms of the protein structural network and ENM were employed to capture PTM cross-talk.
• We propose a novel deep neural network that integrates the structural information of the PPI graph for interprotein PTM cross-talk prediction. • Evaluations of PPICT on potential PTM cross-talks between PTM enzymes and corresponding PTM substrates just verified the high performance of PPICT.

Funding
This work was supported by National Natural Science Foundation of China (61303108, 31872723, 32271292); Natural Science Foundation of Jiangsu Province (BK20211102). We are grateful for the grant from the State Key Laboratory of Drug Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, Chinese Academy of Sciences (SIMM2205KF-11) and from Key Laboratory of Systems Biomedicine (Ministry of Education), Shanghai Center for Systems Biomedicine, Shanghai Jiao Tong University (KLSB2019KF-02). This project was funded by the Priority Academic Program Development of Jiangsu Higher Education Institutions, China.

Data availability
Python code for local computer is also freely available at https:// github.com/ComputeSuda/PPICT.

Author contributions statement
Algorithm design and analysis: F.Z., L.D. and Z.L.. Conceived and designed the experiments: F.Z., L.D. and Z.L.. Performed the experiments: L.D., G.Z. and Y.D.. Analyzed the data: F.Z., L.D., F.M., G.H. and Z.L.. Wrote the paper: F.Z., L.D., F.M., C.L., G.H. and Z.L..

References
1. Leutert M, Entwisle SW, Villén J. Decoding post-translational modification crosstalk with proteomics. Mol Cell Proteomics 2021; 20:1–738.   
2. Saskia Venne A, Kollipara L, Zahedi RP. The next level of complexity: crosstalk of posttranslational modifications. Proteomics 2014; 14(4–5): 513–24.   
3. Cuijpers SAG, Vertegaal ACO. Guiding mitotic progression by crosstalk between post-translational modifications. Trends Biochem Sci 2018; 43(4): 251–68.   
4. Ramani MKV, Yang W, Irani S, et al.Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication—crosstalk of post-translational modifications on the rna polymerase ii. J Mol Biol 2021;166912.   
5. Tomasi ML, Ramani K. Sumoylation and phosphorylation crosstalk in hepatocellular carcinoma. Transl. Gastroenterol Hepatol 2018; 3.   
6. Habibian JS, Bolino M, Ferguson BS. Acetylationphosphorylation cross-talk: a role for hdacs in the regulation of pkcdelta/theta phosphorylation. FASEB J 2020; 34(S1): 1–12.   
7. Li H, Yang D, Ning S, et al.Switching of the substrate specificity of protein tyrosine phosphatase n12 by cyclin-dependent kinase 2 phosphorylation orchestrating 2 oncogenic pathways. FASEB J 2018; 32(1): 73–82.   
8. Li X, Li XD. Integrative chemical biology approaches to deciphering the histone code: a problem-driven journey. Acc Chem Res 2021; 54(19): 3734–47. features of ptm crosstalk in chromatin regulation. Mol Cell Proteomics 2016; 15(8): 2715–29.   
10. Hunter T. The age of crosstalk: phosphorylation, ubiquitination, and beyond. Mol Cell 2007; 28(5): 730–8.   
11. Javaid N, Choi S. Acetylation-and methylation-related epigenetic proteins in the context of their targets. Genes (Basel) 2017; 8(8): 196.   
12. Laarse van der SAM, Leney AC, Heck AJR. Crosstalk between phosphorylation and o-glc na cylation: friend or foe. FEBS J 2018; 285(17): 3152–67.   
13. Meng F, Liang Z, Zhao K, et al.Drug design targeting active posttranslational modification protein isoforms. Med Res Rev 2021; 41(3): 1701–50.   
14. Zhang H, He J, Guang H, et al.Dynamics of post-translational modification inspires drug design in the kinase family. J Med Chem 2021; 64(20): 15111–25.   
15. Minguez P, Letunic I, Parca L, et al.Ptmcode: a database of known and predicted functional associations between posttranslational modifications in proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2012; 41(D1): D306–11.   
16. Minguez P, Letunic I, Parca L, et al.Ptmcode v2: a resource for functional associations of post-translational modifications within and between proteins. Nucleic Acids Res 2015; 43(D1): D494–502.   
17. Huang Y, Bosen X, Zhou X, et al.Systematic characterization and prediction of post-translational modification cross-talk. Mol Cell Proteomics 2015; 14(3): 761–70.   
18. Huang R, Huang Y, Guo Y, et al.Systematic characterization and prediction of post-translational modification cross-talk between proteins. Bioinformatics 2019; 35(15): 2626–33.   
19. Li Y, Huang Y, Li T. Ptm-x: Prediction of post-translational modification crosstalk within and across proteins. In: Computational Methods for Predicting Post-Translational Modification Sites. Springer, 2022, 275–83.   
20. Hao-Dong X, Liang R-P, Wang Y-G, et al.Musp: a high-accuracy map of the in situ crosstalk of ubiquitylation and sumoylation proteome predicted via the feature enhancement approach. Brief Bioinform 2021; 22(3): bbaa050.   
21. Liu H-F, Liu R. Structure-based prediction of post-translational modification cross-talk within proteins using complementary residue-and residue pair-based features. Brief Bioinform 2020; 21(2): 609–20.   
22. Nussinov R, Tsai C-J, Xin F, et al.Allosteric post-translational modification codes. Trends Biochem Sci 2012; 37(10): 447–55.   
23. Craveur P, Narwani TJ, Rebehmed J, et al.Investigation of the impact of ptms on the protein backbone conformation. Amino Acids 2019; 51(7): 1065–79.   
24. Xin F, Radivojac P. Post-translational modifications induce significant yet not extreme changes to protein structure. Bioinformatics 2012; 28(22): 2905–13.   
25. Zhu F, Yang S, Meng F, et al.Leveraging protein dynamics to identify functional phosphorylation sites using deep learning models. J Chem Inf Model 2022.   
26. Liang Z, Verkhivker GM, Guang H. Integration of network models and evolutionary analysis into high-throughput modeling of protein dynamics and allosteric regulation: theory, tools and applications. Brief Bioinform 2020; 21(3): 815–35.   
27. Jianfei H, Rho H-S, Newman RH, et al.Phosphonetworks: a database for human phosphorylation networks. Bioinformatics 2014; 30(1): 141–2.   
28. Jianfei H, Rho H-S, Newman RH, et al.Global analysis of phosphorylation networks in humans. Biochimica et Biophysica Acta (BBA)-Proteins and Proteomics 2014; 1844(1): 224–31.   
29. Duan G, Walther D. The roles of post-translational modifications in the context of protein interaction networks. PLoS Comput Biol 2015; 11(2): e1004049.   
30. Ayati M, Yilmaz S, Chance MR, et al.Functional characterization of co-phosphorylation networks. Bioinformatics 2022; 38(15): 3785–93.   
31. Yang H, Wang M, Liu X, et al.Phosidn: an integrated deep neural network for improving protein phosphorylation site prediction by combining sequence and protein–protein interaction information. Bioinformatics 2021; 37(24): 4668–76.   
32. Liu C, Han Z, Zhang Z-K, et al.A network-based deep learning methodology for stratification of tumor mutations. Bioinformatics 2021; 37(1): 82–8.   
33. Song C, Ye M, Liu Z, et al.Systematic analysis of protein phosphorylation networks from phosphoproteomic data. Mol Cell Proteomics 2012; 11(10): 1070–83.   
34. Woodsmith J, Stelzl U. Studying post-translational modifications with protein interaction networks. Curr Opin Struct Biol 2014; 24:34–44.   
35. Zhu F, Li F, Deng L, et al.Protein interaction network reconstruction with a structural gated attention deep model by incorporating network structure information. J Chem Inf Model 2022; 62: 258–73.   
36. Hong J, Luo Y, Zhang Y, et al.Protein functional annotation of simultaneously improved stability, accuracy and false discovery rate achieved by a sequence-based deep learning. Brief Bioinform 2020; 21(4): 1437–47.   
37. Hong J, Luo Y, Mou M, et al.Convolutional neural network-based annotation of bacterial type iv secretion system effectors with enhanced accuracy and reduced false discovery. Brief Bioinform 2020; 21(5): 1825–36.   
38. Chen Z, Liu X, Li F, et al.Large-scale comparative assessment of computational predictors for lysine posttranslational modification sites. Brief Bioinform 2019; 20(6): 2267–90.   
39. Dou L, Yang F, Lei X, et al.A comprehensive review of the imbalance classification of protein post-translational modifications. Brief Bioinform 2021; 22(5): bbab089.   
40. UniProt Consortium. Uniprot: a worldwide hub of protein knowledge. Nucleic Acids Res 2019; 47(D1): D506–15.   
41. Hornbeck PV, Kornhauser JM, Latham V, et al.15 years of phosphositeplus® integrating post-translationally modified sites, disease variants and isoforms. Nucleic Acids Res 2019; 47(D1): D433–41.   
42. Huang H, Arighi CN, Ross KE, et al.Iptmnet: an integrated resource for protein post-translational modification network discovery. Nucleic Acids Res 2018; 46(D1): D542–50.   
43. Lin S, Wang C, Zhou J, et al.Epsd: a well-annotated data resource of protein phosphorylation sites in eukaryotes. Brief Bioinform 2021; 22(1): 298–307.   
44. Liu Z, Wang Y, Gao T, et al.Cplm: a database of protein lysine modifications. Nucleic Acids Res 2014; 42(D1): D531–6.   
45. Cramer P. Alphafold2 and the future of structural biology. Nat Struct Mol Biol 2021; 28(9): 704–5.   
46. Deng W, Wang C, Zhang Y, et al.Gps-pail: prediction of lysine acetyltransferase-specific modification sites from protein sequences. Sci Rep 2016; 6(1): 1–10.   
47. Nussinov R, Tsai C-J, Csermely P. Allo-network drugs: harnessing allostery in cellular networks. Trends Pharmacol Sci 2011; 32(12): 686–93.   
48. Szklarczyk D, Gable AL, Nastou KC, et al.The string database in 2021: customizable protein–protein networks, and functional characterization of user-uploaded gene/measurement sets. Nucleic Acids Res 2021; 49(D1): D605–12.   
49. Liu B, Bo H. Hprd: a high performance rdf database. Int J Parallel Emergent Distrib Syst 2010; 25(2): 123–33.   
50. Brown KR, Jurisica I. Unequal evolutionary conservation of human protein interactions in interologous networks. Genome Biol 2007; 8(5): 1–11.   
51. Oughtred R, Stark C, Breitkreutz B-J, et al.The biogrid interaction database: 2019 update. Nucleic Acids Res 2019; 47(D1): D529–41.   
52. Bakan A, Dutta A, Mao W, et al.Evol and prody for bridging protein sequence evolution and structural dynamics. Bioinformatics 2014; 30(18): 2681–3.   
53. Grant BJ, Skjaerven L, Yao X-Q. The bio3d packages for structural bioinformatics. Protein Sci 2021; 30(1): 20–30.   
54. Zhang S, Krieger JM, Zhang Y, et al.Prody 2.0: increased scale and scope after 10 years of protein dynamics modelling with python. Bioinformatics 2021.   
55. Zengchao M, Ting Y, Liu X, et al.Fegs: a novel feature extraction model for protein sequences and its applications. BMC Bioinform 2021; 22(1): 1–15.   
56. Wang D, Cui P, and Zhu W. Structural deep network embedding. In Proceedings of the 22nd ACM SIGKDD international conference on Knowledge discovery and data mining, 1225–34, 2016.   
57. Salha G, Hennequin R, Vazirgiannis M. Keep it simple: graph autoencoders without graph convolutional networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:191000942 2019.   
58. Sherman BT, Ming Hao J, Qiu XJ, et al.David: a web server for functional enrichment analysis and functional annotation of gene lists (2021 update). Nucleic Acids Res 2022; 10.   
59. Huang DW, Sherman BT, Lempicki RA. Systematic and integrative analysis of large gene lists using David bioinformatics resources. Nat Protoc 2009; 4(1): 44–57.   
60. Huttlin EL, Bruckner RJ, Navarrete-Perea J, et al.Dual proteomescale networks reveal cell-specific remodeling of the human interactome. Cell 2021; 184(11): 3022–40.