A study on zero-shot learning from semantic viewpoint
P K Bhagat\(^{1}\) \(\circledcirc\) · Prakash Choudhary\(^{2}\) · Kh Manglem Singh\(^{1}\)
Accepted: 18 March 2022 / Published online: 30 May 2022 \(\circledcirc\) The Author(s), under exclusive licence to Springer-Verlag GmbH Germany, part of Springer Nature 2022

Abstract
Recognition of unseen object class by a human being is always based on the relationship between seen and unseen classes, given that human has some background knowledge of the unseen object class. Zero-shot learning is a learning paradigm that tries to develop a recognition model to recognize mutually exclusive training and testing classes. A zero-shot learning model trained on labeled data can also recognize unseen classes when sufficient information about the relationship between seen and unseen classes is given. Semantic space contains semantic information about seen and unseen classes. It is an important part of zero-shot learning and acts as a bridge between seen and unseen classes. In this article, we provide a compact and comprehensive survey on zero-shot learning. First, we explain the different ways to construct semantic space along with its pros and cons. Next, we present a categorization of zero-shot learning methods from the semantic space construction point of view. Furthermore, this paper also presents performance evaluation measures with a relevant and influential zero-shot learning database.
Keywords Zero-shot learning \(\cdot\) Semantic Space \(\cdot\) Machine learning \(\cdot\) ZSL datasets \(\cdot\) Computer vision

1 Introduction
The conventional machine learning techniques require labeled images. The labeling of the image itself is a complex task. However, very few object classes can be recognized and labeled by any ordinary human being while some object classes require a subject expert for accurate labeling especially when fine-grained object classes are involved (i.e., an ordinary person treats all the species of fishes same and cannot differentiate among the species of fishes). As shown in Fig. 1, a "blue whale" is different from a "killer whale," but for an ordinary person, it is just a whale. Only the expert in fish species can recognize the difference between "blue whale" and "killer whale" by seeing the images. Thus, a subject expert is required to label such a fine-grained object class
which is a costly process. What if the machine learning algorithms can recognize the object class that has not been used for the training process? That is, is it possible for the machine to be trained on a different set of object classes and test on a different set of object classes? In simple language, if, in the dataset, training and testing object classes are mutually exclusive, then can we design a model which is suitable for the above-mentioned dataset. For example, if the machine is trained on the horse class then does the machine has the capability to recognize the zebra class that it has never seen before?
Recognition of unseen object class by a human being is always based on the relationship between seen and unseen classes, given that human has some background knowledge of the unseen object class. The relationship between the seen object class and the unseen object class is obtained based on the characteristics of the seen and unseen object classes. Let us say that we have seen a horse but never seen a zebra, but we know that the zebra is almost similar to the horse, i.e., most of the characteristics of a zebra and a horse are similar except that zebra has stripes on its body. Now, we are given an image of a zebra, we can easily relate a zebra with a horse and could say that a zebra is similar to a horse with stripes of the body of a zebra. Thus, with our background knowledge
Fig. 1 Example of fine-grained fish species. a An instance blue whale, b an instance of killer whale
about the relationship between a zebra and a horse, we can identify that the given image object is a zebra.
Zero-shot learning (ZSL) is a problem setup where the task is to identify an object class that has never been seen before. Given a training set \(\{X,Y\}\), where \(X\) is a set of training images and \(Y\) is the corresponding class labels, ZSL method tries to learn a classifier that is able to classify \(\{X^{\prime}\rightarrow Y^{\prime}\}\), where \(X^{\prime}\) is testing images and \(Y^{\prime}\) is the corresponding class labels of \(X^{\prime}\). It should be noted that \(Y\) and \(Y^{\prime}\) are mutually exclusive, i.e., \(Y\cap Y^{\prime}=\emptyset\). The challenge is to train the system to recognize an unseen object if the background knowledge about the correlation between seen and unseen object classes is given. In the case of the ZSL problem, a ZSL model can be classified in one of the two categories: (1) Supervised model: the test image is categorized as one of the training classes as an intermediate class and then the final class is obtained using projection or mapping [30,40]. These types of models use data from the seen classes only. (2) Semi-supervised model: the model does not solve any intermediate problem, instead attempts to obtain the required ZSL class directly, but uses both the labeled data from the seen classes and unlabeled data from the unseen classes during the training [23,32]. The human perception of the unseen class is based on a supervised technique. A human first tries to find the seen class nearest to the unseen class and then using the background knowledge recognizes the unseen class. For instance, a zebra is related to a horse (based on the visual characteristics, the horse is nearest to the zebra), and then it is recognized as a zebra based on the correlation between a horse and a zebra.
In supervised learning, all the testing classes are already seen during the training in a sufficient number. While in few-shot learning or one-shot learning, only a few training
instances of testing classes are present during the training [67,69,71]. Here, \(Y\) and \(Y^{\prime}\) are not mutually exclusive, but only a few instances for \(Y^{\prime}\) exist during training. However, in zero-shot learning, \(Y\) and \(Y^{\prime}\) are mutually exclusive, and no instances for \(Y^{\prime}\) exist during training. ZSL methods exploit a prior source of knowledge like attributes [15,39,59], textural features [59,76,77] or other source of information [50] to recognize unseen classes. There exists a list of prominent methods proposed for zero-shot learning [3,4,18,21,37,40,78,85,90,94,106].
The correlation between seen classes and unseen classes is obtained using the mapping function. Although various types of mapping functions have been proposed previously as described in [91], in supervised learning, all the testing classes are already seen during the training in a sufficient number. While in few-shot learning or one-shot learning, only a few training instances of testing classes are present during the training. First, the classifier is learned for the attributes, and then the mapping function is used to obtain the unseen class from the attributes [24,26,30,39]. The problem with these types of methods is that they restrict the fusion of attributes, i.e., if we take attributes from different sources or if the number of attributes is very large, then we need to train a very large number of the classifiers for the attributes. There also exists some work where the mapping function maps the seen class to the unseen class based on the semantic information or some other means [11,23,38,76,108]. The mapping between seen and unseen classes is implemented through a cosine similarity [38], ontological structures in WordNet [76], etc. A graph-based distance calculated in semantic space using manifold distance to construct the binary classifier is proposed in [23]. Here, the model used training data along with seen class attributes and unseen class attributes during the training. A multiclass classifier using SVM is proposed to classify the testing image to one of the training classes in [76], and here similarity on the semantic space is used to obtain the final class label.
In zero-shot learning, \(Y\) and \(Y^{\prime}\) are mutually exclusive. Then, it can be an argument about how a trained model can recognize an unseen class. The answer is by exploiting semantic space, some relationships among the training and testing classes can be obtained. Semantic space works as a bridge between training and testing classes. It contains information about seen and unseen classes so it can establish a relationship among them. Semantic space is the foundation of visual recognition of unseen objects by a human. ZSL methods also use semantic space to recognize unseen classes given that it should contain information about all the seen and unseen classes.
Semantic spaces are usually categorized as (i) engineered semantic spaces, and (ii) learned semantic spaces [91]. Attribute space is one of the engineered semantic spaces designed manually by the expert human. But, when attributes
Fig. 2 A general process of attribute collection and attribute matrix generation [9]
are obtained automatically, by using some automatic models [89] and without any manual interference, from side information [105] or predefined ontology [54], it also produces a corresponding label embedding. Various types of label embedding methods can be seen in [2]. The label embedding is usually in the continuous form [14,79] but can also be converted to binary format [36,58]. The identification of textural properties and attributes for the texture segmentation is shown in [61]. The label embedding models are trained on a vast amount of data and are capable of generating a vector representation by measuring the similarity among words, multiple degrees of similarity [53], words with similar endings [52], etc. A detailed description of label embedding and generation of attribute matrix for the ZSL database is shown in Fig. 2. Defining the correlation between attributes ensures the prediction of the precise class, even though attributes for a particular class have some missing information [31].
Although there exist various problems with deep learning-based object recognition models [6], most of the ZSL models use deep learning-based features, and some ZSL models proposed recently use end-to-end deep learning [7,33,80,104]. A fusion of multiple semantic spaces into the deep learning-based ZSL model has been proposed in [104]. The proposed model removes the hubness problem [41], which is an inherent problem in high-dimensional feature space and causes the curse of dimensionality. To deal with the lack of training classes, the generation of synthesized visual features from the available features has been proposed in [33]. The authors
also proposed to use a deep embedding-based module to train the visual feature extractor and the embedding transfer net simultaneously. A generative adversarial network-based generative model to learn from unsupervised data is proposed in [80]. The authors claimed improvement in classification accuracy for generalized zero-shot learning (GZSL). The GZSL simplifies the problem setup of the conventional ZSL and the task is to identify whether a given image belongs to a seen class or unseen class [12]. A simple two-stage network, which is easy to implement, to solve the ZSL problem has been proposed in [78]. The authors discussed that the proposed model can be extended to multiple layers to deal with nonlinearities.
Semantic space is a common space that contains semantic information about seen and unseen classes. It is an important part of ZSL and acts as a bridge between seen and unseen classes. To solve the ZSL problem, some kind of auxiliary information is a prerequisite. The auxiliary information has to contain knowledge about both the seen and unseen classes. Semantic space combines auxiliary information obtained from various sources to represent a piece of meaningful information that can be used to solve the ZSL problem. The available source of linguistic information can be very noisy [101], semantic space deals with two inherent challenges: vocabulary mismatch and ambiguity and represents the standard format of the natural language without any ambiguity. The semantic space can be constructed either by humans or machines. If it is constructed from the attributes obtained by humans, it is called user-defined or human-defined semantic space. Semantic space can also be constructed by a textual description of the object/class by the machine. The attributes or the textual descriptions represent the information about the object classes. That means, it states the characteristics of the object/scene present in the image. This information (characteristics) is about both seen and unseen classes. An accurate and robust attribute has to be obtained to represent a class correctly. When semantic space is generated from the attributes, these attributes can be obtained by a human or can also be generated automatically. The human designed semantic attributes may not have enough discriminative capability to represent different classes. As attributes have a basic facet to correlate with each other, it is too complex to define beforehand when attributes are obtained by a human. There also exists some work [25,30,42] where these attributes are generated automatically.
The ZSL methods that use attribute classifiers [13,15,30, 40] imply a multiclass classifier to classify attributes and then use some inference function to obtain a class label for the testing images. Classifier-based ZSL methods usually require a binary value for each attribute (a binary label embedding matrix). Classifier-based ZSL methods try to learn a classifier for the attributes like SVM or logistic regression with the available training data. Then applying the learned classifier
and inference function, the class label for an unseen image is obtained. Some previous methods focused on the improvement of the attribute classifier [30]. Their idea is to implicate information about other attributes or class labels. Most of the classifier-based ZSL methods train classifiers for the attributes, and there are only a few works [11,23,38,76] that use classifiers for the training classes. Although the attributes are an important source of information, some other sources of information can also be exploited and used to improve the performance of the ZSL model [2]. This is not possible for the attribute classifier-based ZSL model. Instead, if the model is using a classifier for class (not attributes), the various sources of information can be leveraged for zero-shot learning.
There exist various survey papers on zero-shot learning problems [22,88,91,95,97] and each paper tried to categorize existing ZSL methods in their own way but none of them focused on the categorization of the ZSL method based on used linguistic information. We have adopted a prior source of knowledge used by the ZSL method as the basis for the classification of ZSL methods which is more specialized and informative. Notably, we will pay much more attention to how efficiently a research work implemented ZSL methods to achieve a useful result. In this survey paper, we will try to cover every aspect of ZSL while explaining how a particular branch of ZSL has expanded and the scope of further improvement. This paper is an attempt to discuss practical approaches, their constraints, and ways to deal. This paper also presents performance evaluation measures and relevant and predominant ZSL databases. In this paper, we comprehensively reviewed more than 100 papers related to ZSL, its baseline and presented the current progress and future trends. The course of the categorization of ZSL methods presented in this survey paper is as shown in Fig. 3. The rest of the article is organized as follows: Sect. 2 gives an overview of the history of ZSL methods. Section 3 presents detailed descriptions of ZSL methods. Section 4 presents some datasets mostly used for training and evaluation of the ZSL model. Section 5 describes the most popularly used evaluation methods for the verification of the performance of the ZSL system followed by conclusion in Sect. 6.

2 Background and preliminaries
Today, almost all technical endeavors are impacted by digital image processing. Digital image processing can be in the form of image enhancement or image attribute extraction or object detection or some other forms. The image enhancement can be characterized by the noise reduction from the original image, contrast enhancement, filtering of the image, etc. Image enhancement, also known as low-level image processing, improves the quality of the image by
Fig. 3 A broad categorization of image ZSL methods
altering the intensity of the image. Although image enhancement improves the quality of the original image, it may also cause the loss of some of the very important information content of the original image [27]. The attributes of images include the edges, contours, objects, etc., present in the image. Image attribute extraction includes segmentation, detection of objects and their extraction, edge detection, classification of objects, etc. The output of the attribute extraction is some symbolic form describing the position and shape of the object. The attribute extraction enables the analysis of the image to a certain level. The extracted attributes may be subjected to further analysis for an in-depth description of the original image. The analysis of the desired portion of the image gives knowledge of the objects and how objects appear in the images. Image attribute extraction and object detection are also known as mid-level image processing.
A high-level image processing is associated with the application of computer vision (CV). Although image processing is a subset of computer vision, computer vision deals with the tasks that the human visual system can do on the image. A human eye has millions of cone cells known as opsins. Each opsin contains one of the three colors and is sensitive to light and changes its shape when hit by light photons. This phenomenon produces neural impulse which is transmitted to the brain for the interpretation [83]. The human eye has a very complex structure and the recognition of objects by the human eye is a complex phenomenon. Hence, making the machine learn the capability of the human eye and interpret the image at the human level has always been a very challenging task. The importance of vision and its simulation by computer have been stated in [73]. The very core motivation of computer vision is to emulate human vision for images and videos in 2D and 3D. As the human eye uses cornea and other body parts to interpret the light to understand the objects, in the same manner, CV uses machine learning, image processing, and other techniques to recognize the patterns for image interpretation.
The recognition of objects by human vision is based on light. The light received by the cornea is transmitted to the cones and rods. The cones and rods translate the light into
Fig. 4 Anatomy of human vision
an electrical signal. This signal is transmitted to the brain by the optic nerve and this electric signal of the image is interpreted by the brain's visual cortex to form the visual map of the object (Fig. 4). Thus, the human vision system is a very complex process and consists of multiple organs of the human body. Although the human eye has a great ability to perceive the image, it can also be deceived. There are some pictures that may create the impression of representation of an object which cannot be represented [10,63]. There are many pictures where the artists apply some tricks to deceive the eye by creating a picture of objects that cannot be physically represented. The dimensions of depth and motion are missing from pictorial images, and this alone introduces all manner of possible ambiguities. On the one hand, human vision is binocular and dynamic and able to perceive depth and motion. On the other hand, pictorial images are static and flat which is able to present us with perceptual paradoxes.
Computer vision, while trying to mimic human vision, uses artificial intelligence (AI) and machine learning techniques to model image processing. With an intent to understand the content of digital images, computer vision tries to extract objects, text, etc., descriptors from the image in order to reproduce the capability of human vision. Computer vision, as a multidisciplinary area of study, is vastly disorganized and requires different approaches for different problems and one approach often looks completely inaccessible for the other [17]. The idea of CV is to automate the process of extraction and recognition of objects, text, etc. from digital images. This will help the computer to make inferences about images automatically and without the help of any human being. Although it may seem simple to teach a computer to mimic human vision involving a simple object in the image, it is very difficult to teach the computer to mimic human vision when a variety of objects (complex objects) are involved in the image. The reason is that our visual system is so good at understanding and extracting objects, even when complex objects are involved, and we do not have a clear picture of how the visual system works. A human vision has the ability to extract something meaningful even from an infinite number of objects/scenes present in the image. However, computer vision works comparatively well in a constrained environment than an unconstrained environment, but when it comes to dealing with unbounded problems visual system is at par with computer vision.
In the conventional object recognition process, the testing class belongs to one of the training classes, i.e., the number of objects is fixed and only those classes of objects are used for the training and testing process. The same object class that is used to train the machine is used for testing. The machine is trained on a collection of images for an object and a different collection of images of the same object is used for testing. To train a machine correctly, it is also mandatory to collect as many samples of an object as possible. It is recommended that the collected samples be from diverse angles in a diverse environment. Most of the time we are able to find a diverse range of samples of an object, but there also exists some cases where only a few samples are available. In such cases, no matter how well the machine is trained, it may not be able to recognize all instances of the object. For example, if we want the machine to be trained and recognize a bird that resides in very difficult terrain and is about to be extinct, it is very difficult to collect enough diverse samples of such a bird. For the machine to recognize the bird correctly, the collected samples should be very diverse, i.e., the collected samples should be from different angles and from all the terrains where the bird resides. The collection process of such samples is very difficult and requires a lot of human effort.
Attribute-based semantic embedding is one of the most widely used semantic embeddings. It is in the form of a word or phrase to describe the characteristics of the object class. It may include physical, sustenance, etc., characteristics. For example, let us say the attributes are black, yellow, white, brown, water, grass, meat, etc., and all the attributes are designed by a human expert. For the binary embedding, each attribute has a value of either 0 or 1. Let us say for horse class the value of black, white, and brown will be 1 because a horse can be one of these colors but the value of yellow will be 0. The advantage of attribute-based semantic embedding is that, as it is designed by a human expert the human domain knowledge can be incorporated. The disadvantage is that it is time-consuming and expensive. Text-based semantic embeddings are constructed from the text or keywords associated with the object class. The source of text or keywords may be general websites or text surrounding the image. The keywords extracted from the text are used to construct the semantic embeddings for the class. It may be designed either by humans or using some automatic learning models. The advantage is that one can generate a large number of keywords from the text and when learning models are used it becomes less labor intensive. The disadvantages of text-based embedding are that when human experts obtain keywords from the text then it consumes a lot of time and when learning models are used to construct the semantic embedding then it is very difficult to incorporate human domain knowledge in the semantic embedding. Latent attributes are alternative to semantic attributes and
alleviate human efforts involved in semantic attribute generation. Latent attributes do not have concise names but the association between class and attributes can be represented by latent attributes. Sometimes latent attributes are semantically meaningful and interpretable but the interpretation is minute. For example, while designing the attributes for a horse class, the human annotator may miss a white mark on the head of the horse but latent attributes generator can detect the same. The advantage is that latent attributes eliminate user efforts to obtain the attributes. The disadvantage includes that it is not nameable and only be loosely interpreted.

3 Types of ZSL method
As every ZSL method needs some kind of side information or prior source of knowledge to establish the connection between seen and unseen class, this side information can be in the form of human annotated attributes, texts, latent attributes, and attributes generated from other sources of information (like WordNet, etc.). Based on this, all ZSL methods fall in one of the four categories: (i) the method that uses human annotated attributes as a prior source of knowledge, we call it the attribute-based ZSL (A_ZSL) method. (ii) The method that uses text as side information to establish the link between seen and unseen classes, we call it the text-based ZSL (T_ZSL) method. (iii) The method that uses latent attributes to establish a connection between seen and unseen classes, we call it the latent attribute-based ZSL (Lt_ZSL) method. (iv) There exist some methods which use different sources (WordNet hierarchy [54], word2vec [51], GloVe [65], etc.) as a prior source of knowledge to establish a relationship between seen and unseen class, we call them the integrated ZSL (I_ZSL) method.

3.1 Attribute-based ZSL (A_ZSL) Method
Attributes represent the characteristics of an object. These characteristics can be represented in the form of color, habitat, physical appearance of the object. The attributes designed by humans are highly related and effective for the ZSL problem but subject to certain constraints. If the attributes are designed by an expert of the subject matter and are also cross-checked by another expert then these attributes are expected to be highly effective and efficient in dealing with the ZSL problem. There exist various methods [2,5,28,39,78,106] that use attributes as side information to establish a link between seen and unseen classes has been described in the literature.
The direct attribute prediction (DAP) and the indirect attribute prediction (IAP) proposed in [39,40] are two steps methods. The performance of IAP is lower than DAP; hence, we discuss the working of DAP only. DAP trains a linear SVM [81] attribute classifier for each attribute separately
and then calculates a posterior probability for each class, and the class having maximum posterior probability is the class label for the new image. A list of problems faced by DAP has been described in [2]. Attribute label embedding (ALE) [2] does not perform any optimization on the attribute classifier. Instead, it uses the attribute classifier with label embedding and compatibility function to obtain the final class label for an image. Attribute label embedding [2] exploits the association between class labels and attributes to compute the label embedding matrix. The association between class labels and attributes can be binary or real valued. Hence, ALE works fine with binary attribute matrix as well as with real value attribute matrix. The advantages of ALE include its direct approach towards learning the model parameters for the optimization of class ranking and its nature to adapt with incremental labels and can also be combined with other sources of information along with attributes. ALE eliminates the intermediate classification step of DAP [39,40]. As DAP is a two stage solution for the ZSL problem, ALE tries to solve ZSL in a single stage without using the attribute classification stage.
Semantic similarity embedding [106] uses attributes as a prior source of information for the mapping of the source domain attribute vector to the histogram of the seen class. During the training, the target domain data (testing class data) is unavailable. During the test time, the target domain data is presented along with unseen source domain data to obtain a histogram that depicts the proportion of unseen class source data to seen class data. The goal of the SSE is to accurately predict the class label of an unseen target domain instance based on the revealed source domain side information of the unseen class. The source and target domains are embedded using subspace clustering and max-margin framework respectively but with an optimization. ESZSL [78] uses attributes as a prior source of information. The model is implemented using two layers neural network. The inference between attributes and class labels is obtained in the second layer of the network by minimizing the multiclass error. The ESZSL is an extension of ALE but instead of minimizing the classification error (as in ALE [2]), ESZSL tries to multiclass error. The relationship between features and attributes is established in the first stage of the network and then the relationship between attributes and classes is learned in the second layer of the network. An attribute-based hierarchical method for zero-shot learning [5] proposes the abstraction of attributes at a different level to obtain the most relevant attributes. Abstraction of attributes helps in distinguishing the most specific attributes of the general attributes. This helps in the expansion of knowledge sources. The selection of appropriate attributes to be shared with unseen class is selected using the hierarchical method in three different stages: propagation of attributes, learning intra-attribute variations, and guiding the transfer of most appropriate attributes to the unseen class. Shared model space [28] uses a transduc-
tive approach to solve the ZSL problem through shared model space learning. Based on multiclass recognition, the model is trained on labeled training data, and during the recognition, attribute space is exploited for knowledge transfer between seen and unseen classes. The proposed method uses a joint learning framework that learns from the source and target data simultaneously by creating a common space. This helps the model to exploit the distribution of target data and transfer the knowledge from the source data to target data. A trifactorization-based ZSL model [100] uses attributes as side information. The proposed model learns a projection matrix from the visual features and uses manifold regularization on visual and semantic space to enhance the capability of the projection matrix. The training of the model is performed on the visual features of the seen class and the semantic embedding matrix of the seen class. The learned projection along with the semantic embedding matrix of the unseen class is used for the prediction of the unseen class. Another attribute-based ZSL method [46] proposed dual semantic mapping to establish a connection between semantic manifold and transfer ability of the model. The proposed method first tries to establish the relationship between seen and unseen classes in two semantic manifolds and then the degree of consistency between the two semantic manifolds is measured using the inter-class semantic consistency. The focus is to establish the relationship between manifold structure and the transfer ability of visual semantic mapping. A generative model based ZSL method [90] uses attributes as a prior source of information to establish the relationship between seen and unseen classes. The proposed model can be used for ZSL, few-shot learning [69,71], and generalized ZSL [12]. The model has the advantage of augmentation of seen and unseen classes during the parameter estimation. The authors in [45] proposed an end-to-end deep learning-based model to solve the ZSL problem. The proposed model integrates the feature extraction step instead of using a pre-trained model for feature extraction. Features are extracted under the supervision of image feature structure constrain which uses triplet loss to regulate intra-class and inter-class distance in image space. The model uses attribute info as a prior source of information. Semantic space construction is supervised by embedding structure constraint that uses structural information of the semantic space to learn a relaxed manifold.
In one of the most recent works on ZSL, the authors in [9] proposed an inductive solution of the ZSL problem in two stages: (i) a multiclass supervised classifier is trained on the training set and then the classifier is asked to classify the testing images to its nearest training class. (ii) A fully connected weighted bipartite graph, which maps training class to testing class, is used to get the final class for each testing image. The proposed method does not require either a testing image or testing class or its corresponding attribute matrix during the training process. The authors designed a mapping function, which is a fully connected weighted bipartite graph, for ZSL problem where training and testing classes are mutually exclusive, to map the training class to the testing class, and the authors proposed a supervised solution to deal with the ZSL problem by integrating the supervised classifier and mapping function. The proposed model is inspired from [76] and [23]. The mapping function, which maps training class to testing class, is inspired by [23]. Instead of using manifold distance in semantic space, authors have taken a simplistic approach and proposed a bipartite graph-based mapping function to map training classes to testing classes. The proposed function has the advantage of exploiting the semantic space and also reduces the complexity involved in the manifold distance as proposed in [23].
tion, which is a fully connected weighted bipartite graph, for ZSL problem where training and testing classes are mutually exclusive, to map the training class to the testing class, and the authors proposed a supervised solution to deal with the ZSL problem by integrating the supervised classifier and mapping function. The proposed model is inspired from [76] and [23]. The mapping function, which maps training class to testing class, is inspired by [23]. Instead of using manifold distance in semantic space, authors have taken a simplistic approach and proposed a bipartite graph-based mapping function to map training classes to testing classes. The proposed function has the advantage of exploiting the semantic space and also reduces the complexity involved in the manifold distance as proposed in [23].
An attention-based semantic embedding method proposed in [98] uses class and its attributes to capture multiple semantic regions without any part detection. The proposed method is an inductive model and uses an attentive region embedding network to deal with the ZSL problem. Another attention-based ZSL method proposed in [110] uses an end-to-end model along with extracted features from the discriminative part regions in the image. The authors combined the global feature and local features (extracted from the different regions of the image) and trained an end-to-end attention based ZSL model. In another work, [99] proposed a ZSL model based on the association between visual features and visual attributes in an image region. The proposed model uses class attributes (without any human designed association between class and attributes) during the training; hence, it can be called a weakly supervised ZSL model.

3.2 Text-based ZSL (T_ZSL) method
It is very hard and time-consuming to obtain attributes manually for a large dataset. Also, attributes are naturally correlated and this correlation is not defined by any human. Sometimes we need to find correlation or decorrelation among attributes to solve the ZSL problem efficiently [25,30,42,48] which is not present in the human designed attributes. Human designed attributes are expensive to generate and may vary from expert to expert. In such cases, it is very important to effectively exploit available linguistic information to construct semantic space. In text-based embedding, a set of keywords are extracted from the linguistic description of the object class. The general source of linguistic data includes general websites, domain specific websites, etc. The extracted keywords define various characteristics of the object class. Each keyword is represented as a dimension in the embedding. If the available linguistic information is too noisy then it is very difficult to construct the keywords.
The authors' experiment on a large-scale dataset with textural information and attributes produced state-of-the-art
results [18]. The labeled sample is used to pre-train a language model which is further used to learn the semantically meaningful relationship between labels and map images into semantic embedding space. DeViSE [18] is trained on 1000 categories of seen image classes and evaluated on 20000 unseen image classes. DeViSE applies a ranking formulation with two pre-trained neural networks optimized over asynchronous stochastic gradient descent with a distributed text representation. The method proposed in [57] trains a multiclass classifier on the training dataset and to map the training class to test class a convex combination is used. The ConSE model is inspired by the DeViSE [18], but instead of replacing the softmax layer, as in DeViSE, ConSE does not train the neural network any further. ConSE utilizes the convex combination of the class label embedding vector and treats the classifier scores as weights in a convex combination of the word vector. The semantic embedding vectors have the capability to mine text in an unsupervised fashion using natural language processing but the choice of the selection of the prior source of knowledge affects the performance of ConSE. A hierarchical embedding model [44] exploits WordNet hierarchy to improve the label embedding. The model exploits the hierarchical structure of the wordNet to obtain the image embedding. This is basically a semantic model in addition to the exploitation of WordNet hierarchy. The model has the advantage of dealing with the low occurrence of the word in a text corpus. The semantic space is trained by a skip-gram model using the word2vec.
Structured joint embeddings (SJE) [4] used both input and output embedding to learn a compatibility function between these embeddings. The output embedding includes attributes embedding, text embedding, and hierarchical embedding. The authors described various advantages of real value association between class and attributes over the binary association. The authors also asserted the use of input embedding can improve the accuracy by a large margin. The accuracy can also be improved by combining various output embedding. The main focus area of SJE is the use of the textual feature as a source of information to bridge the gap between seen and unseen class labels. The experiment of SJE with supervising output embedding (attribute features), semi-supervised output embedding (word2vec features), and unsupervised output embedding (textual features) is a commendable job.

3.3 Latent attribute-based ZSL (Lt_ZSL) method
An alternative to semantic attributes is latent attributes. The problem with semantic attributes is that they are not exhaustively defined. Also, there are some properties of the attributes that are not nameable but are shareable and these properties are termed as latent attributes [16,70,74,84,102].
Joint semantic and latent attribute (JSLA) [64] is an attribute learning method that jointly learns user-defined
attributes and latent attributes. The authors focus on the two latent attributes: discriminative latent attribute (D-LA) which is useful for object recognition because these types of attributes are directly related to class labels and background latent attributes (B-LA) for data reconstruction. Although user-defined attributes are direct and simple, latent attributes are semantically meaningful and interpretable and when attributes are learned jointly, it becomes more useful for ZSL. The advantages of the latent attributes over the user-defined attributes are explained in [34]. The authors propose the use of the latent attribute learning method based on a dictionary learning framework. The authors claim that user-defined attributes are not discriminative enough to recognize different classes and also, it lacks the ability to represent the correlation and interdependence of the attributes. The authors claimed that the proposed latent attribute learning method will tackle the ZSL problem more conveniently. The designing of an attribute classifier for the latent attribute is more convenient as human designed attributes have large variations among them. The authors in [47] proposed an end-to-end model to solve the ZSL problem. The model includes the capability of low-level feature learning, attribute learning, and construction of embedding space in accordance with low-level features. While extracting the features, the model can automatically identify the most discriminative region in the image, and then features are extracted from that region only. While learning the attributes, the model jointly learns user-defined attributes and latent attributes. These two processes are jointly implemented by the model so that they can assist each other to improve the learning capability of the model. The work carried out in [56] proposed to enforce semantic consistency during training, synthesized feature generation, and classification stages. The synthesized features are generated from latent attributes and then transformed into discriminative features for classification. Another work carried out in [82] uses shared latent space to learn class embedding using aligned variational autoencoders. Hence, the obtained synthesized latent features are very discriminative in nature and contain essential information about unseen classes.

3.4 Integrated ZSL (I_ZSL) method
When various types of attributes are combined or learned together from various sources in a ZSL method, we call these methods as integrated ZSL methods. There exist some methods that use human designed attributes along with other sources of information to establish a link between seen and unseen object classes. A transfer learning-based method [75] exploits attributes to transfer knowledge by attribute representation at the intermediate level and by calculating the similarities among the known object classes. The attribute representation is achieved using DAP while direct similar-
ity is calculated from the most similar training classes. The purpose is to exploit the similarities in the unlabeled data distribution so that the semantic knowledge transfer can be extended to the transductive setting. The model proposed in [94] is based on a ranking-based objective function for the penalization of the incorrect classes. During the training process, instead of learning a single map (as in the bilinear compatibility model), it learns multiple maps to maximize the compatibility between input and output embedding. The authors assume this will help in capturing different visual characteristics of the object for better classification accuracy. The distribution of complexity among the maps enables the model to have greater generalization capability. The model can use various types of information (such as attributes, text, and hierarchy) as a prior source of information. The model is experimented with various output embeddings and shows a good performance. The authors in [11] proposed a graphical model to solve the ZSL problem. The proposed model consists of semantic space and model space and in each space, there are object classes. In the proposed weighted graphical model, each node represents an object class and the weight between any two vertices represents the relationship between vertices. To establish the relationship between seen and unseen classes, a phantom class is introduced which acts as a base classifier for seen and unseen class classifiers. Thus, the proposed model leverages the idea of manifold learning by learning manifold embeddings from graphs composed of object classes. The boosting-based model [66] uses semantic correlation regularization (SCR) for the knowledge transfer. It is basically a transfer learning-based method with a focus on model effectiveness and model adaptation. Boosting is used for the model effectiveness and SCR is used to regulate the learned boosting model. The proposed model has the ability of self-controlled sample selection. SCR, which improves the model adaptation to target classes, is consistent with the source-target correlation.
The authors in [35] present a discriminative approach to generate synthesized visual features of the unseen classes so that the ZSL problem can be converted to a supervised problem. All the ZSL methods that have the capability to generate synthesized data can be used to solve the generalized ZSL (GZSL) problem. The proposed method learns a conditional generator to generate the synthesized visual features based on seen features. It converts the ZSL problem into a standard supervised problem. The work carried out in [96] uses GAN to obtain the synthesized features for the unseen classes. The CNN features are generated based on class-level semantic information by optimizing Wasserstein distance and with classification loss. Just like [96], the work carried out in [60,103] proposed a generative visual feature generation model which is bidirectional in nature. The proposed model [60] generates synthesized features from semantic information and generated features can also be
mapped to the correct semantic space. The work carried out in [103] improved [60] and gave a theoretical ground for balancing and improving the seen/unseen classification through counterfactual faithfulness and counterfactual inference. The method proposed in [49] presents a completely different way to solve the ZSL problem. The authors attempt to convert the unseen classes to seen classes with the help of a semantic description. With the help of a semantic description of the unseen class, visual elements of the unseen class are generated. From the visual elements, the authors try to infer the visual feature by combining the visual elements of the seen class. The attributes extracted from the semantic descriptor play an important role in the visual feature synthesis. Thus, visual features of the unseen classes, without acquiring the real images, are generated at the training stage with the help of semantic attributes. Thus, the ZSL problem is converted into a supervised problem and the synthesized visual features can be fed into any supervised classifier.
The SCoRe is an attribute-based ZSL method with an intention to exploit the attribute correlations and learn an independent classifier for each attribute. SCoRe [55] is a combination of methods based on recognition using independent semantics (RIS) [15,40,62,87,92] and recognition using semantic embeddings (RULE) [1,4,43,68,72,78] to leverage the relationship among attributes and designing an independent classifier for each semantic. The RIS and RULE are complementary to each other and their combination (SCoRe) leverages the advantages of both RIS and RULE. Semantic AutoEncoder (SAE) [37] is basically an attribute-based ZSL method that uses encoder and decoder to obtain semantic and visual representation back and forth. The encoder constructs the semantic representation from the visual representation and the decoder reconstructs the visual representation from the semantic representation. This will help the projection to preserve all the information contained in the visual features. The authors also obtained semantic word vector representation for large-scale data using word2vec [51]. The SAE is experimented with using attributes as well as word vectors. A generative approach to produce synthesized visual features of the unseen class from the seen class visual features is presented in [109]. The model leverages the semantic descriptor of the unseen class. The semantic descriptor may be in the form of a textural description of the image. The task is to identify the attributes in the textural descriptor so that the visual features of the given text can be generated artificially. Once the visual feature of the unseen class is generated, the ZSL problem can be converted into a typical supervised problem. A transductive learning-based method [107] tries to solve the ZSL problem through a min-min optimization problem. The authors propose a feature reconstruction method where visual features are projected into semantic space and then it is projected back in the reverse direction to reconstruct the original feature vector. The proposed method uses human
annotated attributes as well as attributes obtained through word2vec.

4 Datasets for ZSL
There exist various datasets [15,39,93,95,97] that can be used to evaluate the efficiency of any ZSL method (Table 1). Some of the datasets come with human defined attributes and for some datasets, the semantic space has to be constructed from the texts or linguistic sources using techniques like Word2Vec, GloVe, etc.

4.1 Animal with attributes
Animal with Attributes (AWA) dataset, introduced in [39], contains 50 classes. The images are collected from Google, Microsoft, Yahoo, and Flickr. The dataset contains 30475 images and comes with six different feature types. The dataset contains 85 human annotated attributes for each class and also contains two numeric attribute matrices (binary and continuous attribute matrices). The human annotated attributes represent various characteristics of the object class including color, habitant, sustenance, etc. The attribute embedding matrix has a dimension of \(50 \times 85\) where each row represents a class and each column represents an attribute. Examples of the attributes are black, white, blue, big, small, etc. AWA is the first dataset for ZSL and used by many authors including the groundbreaking work in [39] to evaluate the performance of their method. Currently, the AWA dataset is suspended due to copyright restrictions and the authors recommend using AWA2 dataset [95,97].

4.2 Animal with attributes 2
Animal with Attribute 2 (AWA2) is an extension of the AWA dataset. AWA does not provide any images; hence, the AWA2 dataset was introduced in [95,97]. The dataset com
prises 37, 322 images of 50 animal categories. The dataset comes with 85 attributes and a binary attribute label embedding matrix. The dataset also contains ILSVRC-pretrained ResNet101 [29,95] features. The following experiments use the same features. Also, for training, validation, and testing, a few splits are proposed in [95,97]. But, instead of using training and validation classes separately, one can combine these two classes as training classes. Thus, out of 50 classes, 40 classes can be used for training and the rest 10 classes for testing. A total of 30, 337 images are for training (training + validation), and the remaining 6, 985 images are for testing. AWA2 is a coarse-grained dataset with a relatively small number of classes (50) and attributes (85). This allows authors to evaluate the performance capability of their ZLS method over a larger number of images with fewer classes and attributes.

4.3 Caltech UCSD birds
Another dataset that can be used for experimental evaluation is Caltech UCSD Birds (CUB) [93]. The dataset comes with 200 classes of birds with 312 attributes. As mentioned in [4], out of 200 classes, 150 classes can be used for training and the remaining 50 classes for testing. There are 11788 images in CUB, out of which 8827 images are for training and 2961 images for testing. CUB is a fine-grained dataset having 11788 images, 200 classes, and 312 attributes. This allows authors to evaluate the performance capability of their ZSL method over a small number of images with a large number of classes and attributes. The attributes provided with the dataset are more informative and very fine-grained. A binary semantic embedding matrix, as well as a continuous semantic embedding matrix, is also provided with the dataset. The images in the dataset are also annotated with segmentation and bounding boxes hence, competitive for attention-based ZSL model.

4.4 Attribute Pascal and Yahoo
4.4 Attribute Pascal and YahooAttribute Pascal and Yahoo (aPY)[15] dataset can also be used for the experiment. The features and settings for the training and testing classes are proposed in [95]. The dataset contains 15339 images with 32 classes and 64 attributes. Out of 32 classes, 20 classes are used for training and 12 classes are used for testing. Out of 15339 images of aPY dataset, aPascal dataset contains 12,695 and aYahoo contains 2644 images. The images of aPascal were collected for the Pascal VOC 2008 challenge and out of 12695 images, 6340 images are for training and 6355 images for testing. However, aYahoo contains 2644 images and all of them are used for testing in aPY dataset.

4.5 ImageNet
4.5 ImageNetImageNet large-scale visual recognition competition 2010 (ILSVRC10) subset [57,75,76] is very diverse dataset for evaluation of computer vision algorithms. It consists of 1.2 million images of 1000 well-defined categories. Although ImageNet does not provide any attributes it can be mined manually from WordNet hierarchy or automatically from the text using Word2vec, GloVe, etc. ImageNet also provides a hierarchical organization of object classes based on the hyponym relations which can be used to obtain attributes that represent the relationship among object classes. Otherwise, we can also generate semantic space automatically from the linguistic knowledge base like Wikipedia, WordNet, etc., using various models like skipgram, Word2Vec, GloVe, etc.There also exists some video-based ZSL datasets for activity recognition [19,20,86]. Most of the datasets for video activity recognition are collected from YouTube.
There also exists some video-based ZSL datasets for activity recognition [19,20,86]. Most of the datasets for video activity recognition are collected from YouTube.

5 Evaluation method
5 Evaluation methodHowever, most of the ZSL problems are based on single label annotation and their performance can be measured by calculating top-1 accuracy or the average of the top-1 accuracy over a few runs. But in some cases, top-T (where \( \mathrm{T}=5 \), 10, or something else) accuracy is calculated even for single label annotation. While calculating the top-T accuracy, it is checked whether the desired label is present in the top-T number of labels predicted by the model and if yes then it is assumed that the model has predicted correctly. For a small-scale dataset, where the number of unseen class labels is small, it is recommended to use top-1 accuracy to ascertain the performance of the proposed model. Otherwise, it will hamper the actual performance evaluation criteria. For example, let us say that the number of the unseen classes is 10, and if we use \( \mathrm{T}=10 \), then the model's performance will be
\(100\%\) no matter how good or how bad the model is designed. But for a large-scale dataset (ImageNet), where the number of unseen classes is very large, it will be too harsh to use top-1 accuracy. In such cases, it is recommended to use \(\mathrm{T}{=}5\) or \(\mathrm{T}{=}10\) .
As the datasets are imbalanced, i.e., different testing classes contain a varied number of images, the accuracy metric alone is not enough to judge the model's performance. Hence, we have also calculated the F1 score to analyze the performance of the proposed model. F1 score is the weighted harmonic mean of the precision and recall. It enables us to accurately evaluate the model's performance on the imbalanced dataset. F1 score is calculated using equation (1) [8]:
where \(\mathrm{TP}=\) actual and obtained results are positive, \(\mathrm{FP=}\) actual result is positive but obtained result is negative, and \(\mathrm{FN=}\) actual result is negative but obtained result is positive.
For multilabel annotation, we need to calculate \(\mathbf{P}\) and R for each class based on one-vs. -res. and then we have to take the average of the \(\mathbf{P}\) and R before calculating the f1 score.

6 Conclusion
6 ConclusionIn this article, we have provided a compact and comprehensive survey on ZSL methods from the semantic space point of view. We have provided an overview of semantic space and a detailed description of the acquisition and preparation of semantic space is also discussed. We also discussed the merits and demerits of semantic space constructed through various means. Based on the construction of semantic space, we have categorized the existing works on ZSL into four categories: (i) the method that uses human annotated attributes as a prior source of knowledge, we call it the attribute-based ZSL (A_ZSL) method. (ii) The method that uses text as side information to establish the link between seen and unseen classes, we call it the text-based ZSL (T_ZSL) method. (iii) The method that uses latent attributes to establish a connection between seen and unseen classes, we call it the latent attribute-based ZSL (Lt_ZSL) method. (iv) There exist some methods which use different sources (WordNet hierarchy, ImageNet, GloVe, etc.) as a prior source of knowledge to establish a relationship between seen and unseen class, we call them the integrated ZSL (I_ZSL) method.This paper also presented the details about some of the predominant databases used for the training and evaluation of the
This paper also presented the details about some of the predominant databases used for the training and evaluation of the
ZSL method. Most of the available databases are intended for the training and evaluation of attribute-based ZSL methods, and only a handful of the database exists for the training and evaluation of ZSL methods which constructs semantic space automatically for the available linguistic information. Apart from that, we have also described the performance evaluation measures.
Acknowledgements The authors would also like to thank the Department of Computer Science and Engineering, National Institute of Technology Manipur, and National Institute of Technology Hamirpur, India, to provide the platform and equipment for the study so that authors are able to perform this study.

Declarations
Conflict of interest The authors declare that they have no conflict of interest to disclose. All the authors have participated in writing this paper and the work is original and is not published elsewhere. This manuscript has not been submitted to, nor is under review at, another journal or other publishing venue.

References
1. Akata, Z., Malinowski, M., Fritz, M., Schiele, B.: Multi-cue zeroshot learning with strong supervision. In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 59–68 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.14 2. Akata, Z., Perronnin, F., Harchaoui, Z., Schmid, C.: Labelembedding for attribute-based classification. In: 2013 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 819–826 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2013.111 3. Akata, Z., Perronnin, F., Harchaoui, Z., Schmid, C.: Labelembedding for image classification. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 38(7), 1425–1438 (2016) 4. Akata, Z., Reed, S., Walter, D., , Schiele, B.: Evaluation of output embeddings for fine-grained image classification. In: 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2927–2936 (2015) 5. Al-Halah, Z., Stiefelhagen, R.: How to transfer? zero-shot object recognition via hierarchical transfer of semantic attributes. In: 2015 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 837–843 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/WACV. 2015.116 6. An, F.P., Liu, J.e., Bai, L.: Object recognition algorithm based on optimized nonlinear activation function-global convolutional neural network. Vis. Comput. pp. 1–13 (2021) 7. Bu, J.L., Swersky, K., Filler, S., Salakhutdinov, R.: Predicting deep zero-shot convolutional neural networks using textual descriptions. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 4247–4255 (2015) 8. Bhagat, P.K., Choudhary, P.: Image annotation: then and now. Image Vis. Comput. 86, 1–23 (2018) 9. Bhagat, P.K., Choudhary, P., Singh, K.M.: A novel approach based on fully connected weighted bipartite graph for zero-shot learning problems. J. Ambient. Intell. Humaniz. Comput. (2021). https:// doi.org/10.1007/s12652-020-02615-6 10. Bradley, D.R., Dumas, S.T.: Ambiguous cognitive contours. Nature 257(5527), 582–584 (1975). https://doi.org/10.1038/ 257582a0
29. He, K., Zhang, X., Ren, S., Sun, J.: Deep residual learning for image recognition. In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 770–778 (2016)30. Huang, S., Elhoseiny, M., Elgammal, A., Yang, D.: Learning hypergraph-regularized attribute predictors. In: 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 409–417 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2015.729863831. Jayaraman, D., Sha, F., Grauman, K.: Decorrelating semantic visual attributes by resisting the urge to share. In: 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1629–1636 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2014.21132. Ji, Z., Wang, Q., Cui, B., Pang, Y., Cao, X., Li, X.: A semisupervised zero-shot image classification method based on softtarget. Neural Netw. 143, 88–96 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neunet.2021.05.01933. Jia, Z., Zhang, Z., Wang, L., Shan, C., Tan, T.: Deep unbiased embedding transfer for zero-shot learning. IEEE Trans. Image Process. 29, 1958–1971 (2020)34. Jiang, H., Wang, R., Shan, S., Yang, Y., Chen, X.: Learning discriminative latent attributes for zero-shot classification. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 4233–4242 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2017.45335. Jurie, F., Bucher, M., Herbin, S.: Generating visual representations for zero-shot classification. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops (ICCVW), pp. 2666–2673 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCVW.2017.30836. Kemp, C., Tenenbaum, J.B., Griffiths, T.L., Yamada, T., Ueda, N.: Learning systems of concepts with an infinite relational model. In: Proceedings of the 21st National Conference on Artificial Intelligence - Volume 1, AAAI'06, pp. 381–388. AAAI Press (2006)37. Kodirov, E., Xiang, T., Gong, S.: Semantic autoencoder for zeroshot learning. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 4447–4456 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.47338. Kordumova, S., Mensink, T., Snoek, C.G.: Pooling objects for recognizing scenes without examples. In: Proceedings of the 2016 ACM on International Conference on Multimedia Retrieval, pp. 143–150 (2016)39. Lampert, C.H., Nickisch, H., Harmeling, S.: Learning to detect unseen object classes by between-class attribute transfer. In: 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 951–958 (2009). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2009.520659440. Lampert, C.H., Nickisch, H., Harmeling, S.: Attribute-based classification for zero-shot visual object categorization. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 36(3), 453–465 (2014)41. Lazaridou, A., Dinu, G., Baroni, M.: Hubness and pollution: Delving into cross-space mapping for zero-shot learning. In: Proceedings of the 53rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics and the 7th International Joint Conference on Natural Language Processing (Volume 1: Long Papers), pp. 270–280 (2015)42. Li, H., Li, D., Luo, X.: Bap: Bimodal attribute prediction for zero-shot image categorization. Proceedings of the 22nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia (2014)43. Li, X., Guo, Y.: Max-Margin Zero-Shot Learning for Multi-class Classification. In: Lebanon, G., Vishwanathan, S. V. N. (eds.) Proceedings of the Eighteenth International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Statistics, Proceedings of Machine Learning Research, pp. 626–634. PMLR, San Diego, California, USA (2015) http://proceedings.mlr.press/v38/li15d.html44. Li, X., Liao, S., Lan, W., Du, X., Yang, G.: Zero-shot image tagging by hierarchical semantic embedding. In: Proceedings of the 38th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, SIGIR '15, pp. 879–882. Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2015). https://doi.org/10.1145/2766462.276777345. Li, Y., Jia, Z., Zhang, J., Huang, K., Tan, T.: Deep semantic structural constraints for zero-shot learning. In: AAAI (2018)46. Li, Y., Wang, D., Hu, H., Lin, Y., Zhuang, Y.: Zero-shot recognition using dual visual-semantic mapping paths. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5207–5215 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.55347. Li, Y., Zhang, J., Zhang, J., Huang, K.: Discriminative learning of latent features for zero-shot recognition. In: 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 7463–7471 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.0077948. Liang, K., Chang, H., Shan, S., Chen, X.: A unified multiplicative framework for attribute learning. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 2506–2514 (2015). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2015.28849. Long, Y., Liu, L., Shao, L., Shen, F., Ding, G., Han, J.: From zeroshot learning to conventional supervised classification: Unseen visual data synthesis. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 6165–6174 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.65350. Mensink, T., Verbeek, J., Perronnin, F., Csurka, G.: Metric learning for large scale image classification: Generalizing to new classes at near-zero cost. In: European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 488–501. Springer (2012)51. Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Efficient estimation of word representations in vector space. In: Y. Bengio, Y. LeCun (eds.) 1st International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2013, Scottsdale, Arizona, USA, May 2-4, 2013, Workshop Track Proceedings (2013)52. Mikolov, T., Kopecky, J., Burget, L., Glembek, O., ?Cernocky, J.: Neural network based language models for highly inflective languages. In: 2009 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing, pp. 4725–4728 (2009)53. Mikolov, T., Yih, W.t., Zweig, G.: Linguistic regularities in continuous space word representations. In: Proceedings of the 2013 Conference of the North American Chapter of the Association for Computational Linguistics: Human Language Technologies, pp. 746–751. Association for Computational Linguistics, Atlanta, Georgia (2013)54. Miller, G. A.: Wordnet: A lexical database for english. Commun. ACM 38(11), 39–41 (1995). https://doi.org/10.1145/219717.21974855. Morgado, P., Vasconcelos, N.: Semantically consistent regularization for zero-shot recognition. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2037–2046 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.22056. Narayan, S., Gupta, A., Khan, F.S., Snoek, C.G., Shao, L.: Latent embedding feedback and discriminative features for zero-shot classification. In: ECCV (2020)57. Norouzi, M., Mikolov, T., Bengio, S., Singer, Y., Shlens, J., Frome, A., Corrado, G., Dean, J.: Zero-shot learning by convex combination of semantic embeddings. In: International Conference on Learning Representations (2014). http://arxiv.org/abs/1312.565058. Osherson, D.N., Stern, J., Wilkie, O., Stob, M., Smith, E.E.: Default probability. Cogn. Sci. 15(2), 251–269 (1991)59. Palatucci, M., Pomerleau, D., Hinton, G., Mitchell, T.M.: Zeroshot learning with semantic output codes. In: Proceedings of the 22Nd International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, NIPS'09, pp. 1410–1418. Curran Associates Inc., USA (2009)60. Pambala, A.K., Dutta, T., Biswas, S.: Generative model with semantic embedding and integrated classifier for generalized zeroshot learning. In: 2020 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications
of Computer Vision (WACV), pp. 1226–1235 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/WACV45572.2020.909362561. Paragios, N., Deriche, R.: Geodesic active regions and level set methods for supervised texture segmentation. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 46(3), 223–247 (2002)62. Parikh, D., Grauman, K.: Relative attributes. In: Proceedings of the 2011 International Conference on Computer Vision, ICCV '11, pp. 503–510. IEEE Computer Society, USA (2011). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2011.612628163. Parkkonen, L., Andersson, J., Hämäläinen, M., Hari, R.: Early visual brain areas reflect the percept of an ambiguous scene. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. (2008). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.081096610564. Peng, P., Tian, Y., Xiang, T., Wang, Y., Pontil, M., Huang, T.: Joint semantic and latent attribute modelling for cross-class transfer learning. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 40(7), 1625–1638 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/TPAMI.2017.272388265. Pennington, J., Socher, R., Manning, C.: GloVe: Global vectors for word representation. In: Proceedings of the 2014 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP), pp. 1532–1543. Association for Computational Linguistics, Doha, Qatar (2014).https://doi.org/10.3115/v1/D14-116266. Pi, T., Li, X., Zhang, Z.M.: Boosted zero-shot learning with semantic correlation regularization. In: Proceedings of the Twenty-Sixth International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence, IJCAI-17, pp. 2599–2605 (2017). https://doi.org/10.24963/ijcai.2017/36267. Qian, K., Wen, X., Song, A.: Hybrid neural network model for large-scale heterogeneous classification tasks in few-shot learning. Vis. Comput. 38(2), 719–728 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00371-020-02046-668. Qiao, R., Liu, L., Shen, C., Van Den Hengel, A.: Less is more: Zero-shot learning from online textual documents with noise suppression. In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2249–2257 (2016).https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.24769. Fergus, R., Perona, P.: One-shot learning of object categories. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 28(4), 594–611 (2006)70. Rastegari, M., Farhadi, A., Forsyth, D.: Attribute discovery via predictable discriminative binary codes. In: Fitzgibbon, A., Lazebnik, S., Perona, P., Sato, Y., Schmid, C. (eds.) Computer Vision - ECCV 2012, pp. 876–889. Springer, Berlin (2012)71. Ravi, S., Larochelle, H.: Optimization as a model for few-shot learning. In: Proceedings of 5th International Conference on Learning Representations, ICLR 2017, Toulon, France, April 24-26, 2017 (2017)72. Reed, S., Akata, Z., Lee, H., Schiele, B.: Learning deep representations of fine-grained visual descriptions. In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 49–58 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.1373. Renault, O., Thalmann, N.M., Thalmann, D.: A vision-based approach to behavioural animation. J. Vis. Comput. Animat. 1(1), 18–21 (1990). https://doi.org/10.1002/vis.434001010674. Rifai, S., Bengio, Y., Courville, A., Vincent, P., Mirza, M.: Disentangling factors of variation for facial expression recognition. In: Fitzgibbon, A., Lazebnik, S., Perona, P., Sato, Y., Schmid, C. (eds.) Computer Vision - ECCV 2012, pp. 808–822. Springer, Berlin (2012)75. Rohrbach, M., Ebert, S., Schiele, B.: Transfer learning in a transductive setting. In: Proceedings of the 26th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems - Volume 1, NIPS'13, pp. 46–54. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA (2013)76. Rohrbach, M., Stark, M., Schiele, B.: Evaluating knowledge transfer and zero-shot learning in a large-scale setting. In: CVPR 2011, pp. 1641–1648 (2011)
77. Rohrbach, M., Stark, M., Szarvas, G., Gurevych, I., Schiele, B.: What helps where–and why? semantic relatedness for knowledge transfer. In: 2010 IEEE Computer Society Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 910–917. IEEE (2010)78. Romera-Paredes, B., Torr, P.: An embarrassingly simple approach to zero-shot learning. In: International Conference on Machine Learning, pp. 2152–2161 (2015)79. Rumelhart, D.E., Hinton, G.E., Williams, R.J.: Parallel distributed processing: Explorations in the microstructure of cognition, vol. 1. chap. Learning Internal Representations by Error Propagation, pp. 318–362. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA (1986)80. Sariyildiz, M.B., Cinbis, R.G.: Gradient matching generative networks for zero-shot learning. In: 2019 IEEE/CVCF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2163–2173 (2019)81. Schuldt, C., Laptev, I., Caputo, B.: Recognizing human actions: A local svm approach. In: Proceedings of the Pattern Recognition, 17th International Conference on (ICPR'04) Volume 3 - Volume 03, ICPR '04, pp. 32–36. IEEE Computer Society, Washington, DC, USA (2004)82. Schönfeld, E., Ebrahimi, S., Sinha, S., Darrell, T., Akata, Z.: Generalized zero- and few-shot learning via aligned variational autoencoders. In: 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 8239–8247 (2019).https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2019.0084483. Shimojo, S., Paradiso, M., Fujita, I.: What visual perception tells us about mind and brain. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. 98(22), 12340–12341 (2001). https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.22138369884. Singh, S., Gupta, A., Efros, A.A.: Unsupervised discovery of mid-level discriminative patches. In: Fitzgibbon, A., Lazebnik, S., Perona, P., Sato, Y., Schmid, C. (eds.) Computer Vision - ECCV 2012, pp. 73–86. Springer, Berlin (2012)85. Socher, R., Ganjoo, M., Manning, C.D., Ng, A.: Zero-shot learning through cross-modal transfer. In: C.J.C. Burges, L. Bottou, M. Welling, Z. Ghahramani, K.Q. Weinberger (eds.) Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 26, pp. 935–943. Curran Associates, Inc. (2013)86. Soomro, K., Zamir, A.R., Shah, M.: UCF101: A dataset of 101 human actions classes from videos in the wild. CoRR abs/1212.0402 (2012)87. Su, Y., Jurie, F.: Improving image classification using semantic attributes. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 100, 59–77 (2012)88. Sun, X., Gu, J., Sun, H.: Research progress of zero-shot learning. Appl. Intell. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1007/s10489-020-02075-789. Tsochantaridis, I., Joachims, T., Hofmann, T., Altun, Y.: Large margin methods for structured and interdependent output variables. J. Mach. Learn. Res. 6, 1453–1484 (2005)90. Verma, V.K., Rai, P.: A simple exponential family framework for zero-shot learning. In: Ceci, M., Holman, J., Todorovski, L., Vens, C., Džeroski, S. (eds.) Machine Learning and Knowledge Discovery in Databases, pp. 792–808. Springer International Publishing, Cham (2017)91. Wang, W., Zheng, X.W., Yu, H., Mao, C.: A survey of zero-shot learning: settings, methods, and applications. ACM Trans. Intell. Syst. Technol. (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/329331892. Wang, X., Ji, Q.: A unified probabilistic approach modeling relationships between attributes and objects. In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 2120–2127 (2013).https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2013.26493. Welinder, P., Branson, S., Mita, T., Wah, C., Schroff, F., Belongie, S., Perona, P.: Caltech-UCSD Birds 200. Tech. Rep. CNS-TR2010-001, California Institute of Technology (2010)94. Xian, Y., Akata, Z., Sharma, G., Nguyen, Q., Hein, M., Schiele, B.: Latent embeddings for zero-shot classification. In: 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 69–77 (2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2016.1595. Xian, Y., Lampert, C.H., Schiele, B., Akata, Z.: Zero-shot learning: a comprehensive evaluation of the good, the bad and the ugly. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. (2018)96. Xian, Y., Lorenz, T., Schiele, B., Akata, Z.: Feature generating networks for zero-shot learning. In: 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 5542–5551 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.0058197. Xian, Y., Schiele, B., Akata, Z.: Zero-shot learning - the good, the bad and the ugly. In: IEEE Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2017)98. Xie, G.S., Liu, L., Jin, X., Zhu, F., Zhang, Z., Qin, J., Yao, Y., Shao, L.: Attentive region embedding network for zero-shot learning. In: 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 9376–9385 (2019). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2019.0096199. Xu, W., Xian, Y., Wang, J., Schiele, B., Akata, Z.: Attribute prototype network for zero-shot learning. In: NeurIPS (2020)100. Xu, X., Shen, F., Yang, Y., Zhang, D., Shen, H.T., Song, J.: Matrix tri-factorization with manifold regularizations for zero-shot learning. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 2007–2016 (2017).https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.217101. Yang, Y., Teo, C.L., Daumé, H., Aloimonos, Y.: Corpus-guided sentence generation of natural images. In: Proceedings of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, EMNLP '11, pp. 444–454. Association for Computational Linguistics, USA (2011)102. Yu, F.X., Cao, L., Feris, R.S., Smith, J.R., Chang, S.: Designing category-level attributes for discriminative visual recognition. In: 2013 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 771–778 (2013). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2013.105103. Yue, Z., Wang, T., Zhang, H., Sun, Q., Hua, X.S.: Counterfactual zero-shot and open-set visual recognition. In: CVPR (2021)104. Zhang, L., Xiang, T., Gong, S.: Learning a deep embedding model for zero-shot learning. In: 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 3010–3019 (2017)105. Zhang, Y., Jin, R., Zhou, Z.H.: Understanding bag-of-words model: a statistical framework. Int. J. Mach. Learn. Cybern. 1(1), 43–52 (2010)106. Zhang, Z., Saligrama, V.: Zero-shot learning via semantic similarity embedding. In: 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pp. 4166–4174 (2015).https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV.2015.474107. Zhao, A., Ding, M., Guan, J., Lu, Z., Xiang, T., Wen, J.R.: Domain-invariant projection learning for zero-shot recognition (2018)108. Zhao, B., Wu, B., Wu, T., Wang, Y.: Zero-shot learning posed as a missing data problem. In: Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision Workshops, pp. 2616–2622 (2017)109. Zhu, Y., Elhoseiny, M., Liu, B., Peng, X., Elgammal, A.: A generative adversarial approach for zero-shot learning from noisy texts. In: 2018 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 1004–1013 (2018).https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00111110. Zhu, Y., Xie, J., Tang, Z., Peng, X., Elgammal, A.: Semantic-Guided Multi-Attention Localization for Zero-Shot Learning. Curran Associates Inc., Red Hook (2019)
P K Bhagat has received his Ph.D. degree from the Department of Computer Science & Engineering at the National Institute of Technology Manipur, Imphal, India. He did his M.Tech from the National Institute of Technology Manipur in 2017. His research interests are Computer Vision, Machine Learning, Automatic Image Annotation, Zero-shot Learning, and Pattern Recognition.
Prakash Choudhary is an Assistant Professor at the Department of Computer Science & Engineering, at National Institute of Technology Hamirpur, India, since December 21, 2018. He was an Assistant Professor from December 2013 to December 2018 at the Department of Computer Science & Engineering at National Institute of Technology Manipur. He received Ph.D. degree from Malaviya National Institute of Technology Jaipur in 2016, the M.Tech degree from Visvesvaraya National Institute of Technology Nagpur in 2012, and B.E. in Information Technology from Govt. Engineering College Ajmer (Rajasthan University) in 2009. His areas of Research include Computer Vision and Image Processing: Content-Based Image Retrieval, Automatic Image Annotation, Medical Imaging, Biometrics, Multilingual Text Recognition in Indian Scripts, Machine Learning, and Pattern Recognition.
National Institute of Technology Nagpur in 2012, and B.E. in Information Technology from Govt. Engineering College Ajmer (Rajasthan University) in 2009. His areas of Research include Computer Vision and Image Processing: Content-Based Image Retrieval, Automatic Image Annotation, Medical Imaging, Biometrics, Multilingual Text Recognition in Indian Scripts, Machine Learning, and Pattern Recognition.
Kh Manglem Singh is currently working as a Professor in NIT Manipur. He received his Ph.D. from Indian Institute of Technology, Govkahati (IITG), Assam, in 2007. He completed his MS from BITS, Pilani Rajasthan in Software System. His area of interest includes digital image and video processing, digital watermarking and information hiding, Hashing Function, and Cyber Forensics.